EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
1AN EXPLORATORY 
SUDY OF 
MOBILE 
MULTIMEDIA 
AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY 
SYSTEM: CHALLENGES AND 
LESSONS FROM 
TAMIL NADU, INDIA  Ganesan Muthiah 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
ganesan@rtbi.in
 Suma Prashant 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
suma@rbti.in
  Jayalakshmi Umadikar 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
jaya@rtbi.in Kavitha Karthikeyan 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
kavithas@rtbi.in
  ABSTRACT
 This paper describes the experiences gained in
 terms of challenges encountered and lessons 
learned in an exploratory initiative of mobile phone-based multimedia agricultural advisory 
System (MAAS), which helps in providing timely
 agricultural expert advice to farmers on 
their mobile phone. When a farmer is calling, a call-centre-like interface containing 
personalized information of that farmer pops up at the expert™s end. The expert views the 
farmer™s dashboard and analyses the situation and query based advisory is provided to the 

farmer. This agricultural advisory system formed part of a research study under National 
Agricultural Innovation Projects (NAIP), New Delhi. The MAAS is developed by Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras™s Rural Technol
ogy and Business Incubator and it was field 
tested with 1200 farmers in three districts of Tamil Nadu (Kancheepuram, Erode and 
Dharmapuri), India, during December 2010 to June 2012. The aim of this paper is to describe 
the experiences, highlighting a number of specific challenges and lessons associated with 
providing mobile based agricultural advisories to farmers in rural areas. 
  Keywords:
 Information and communication technology;
 Mobile phone; Agricultural 
advisory; Agricultural extension; Agricultural information; India
  1.  I
NTRODUCTION
 Agriculture is still the predominant livelihood in rural India, accounting for about 52 per cent 
of the population though its contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has decreased 
between 1990-91 and 2010-11 from 30.00 per cent to 14.50 per cent (SIA, 2012). Information 

and Communication Technologies (ICTs) play a key role in communicating knowledge and 
information to rural farming communities. ICTs include technologies and media that capture, 
store and disseminate data and information, and they include tools such as video, teletext, 
voice information systems, radio, mobile telephony, fax and computer-mediated networks 
among others.
ICTs are considered drivers of change for rural and agricultural development. 
They are efficient tools for reaching rural and remote communities and improving 
agricultural productivity (Richardson, 1997; 
Warren, 2002; Harris, 2004; May et al., 2007).  
While involving in agricultural operations, a farmer needs different types of 
information during every stage. For instance, availability of agricultural inputs and input 
prices information are most useful at planting time whereas information about improved crop 

production and management practices are mainly helpful to farmers during crop cultivation. 
Similarly, daily updates on the prices of agricultural commodities in the local markets of the 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
1AN EXPLORATORY 
SUDY OF 
MOBILE 
MULTIMEDIA 
AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY 
SYSTEM: CHALLENGES AND 
LESSONS FROM 
TAMIL NADU, INDIA  Ganesan Muthiah 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
ganesan@rtbi.in
 Suma Prashant 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
suma@rbti.in
  Jayalakshmi Umadikar 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
jaya@rtbi.in Kavitha Karthikeyan 
IITM's Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator 
India 
kavithas@rtbi.in
  ABSTRACT
 This paper describes the experiences gained in
 terms of challenges encountered and lessons 
learned in an exploratory initiative of mobile phone-based multimedia agricultural advisory 
System (MAAS), which helps in providing timely
 agricultural expert advice to farmers on 
their mobile phone. When a farmer is calling, a call-centre-like interface containing 
personalized information of that farmer pops up at the expert™s end. The expert views the 
farmer™s dashboard and analyses the situation and query based advisory is provided to the 

farmer. This agricultural advisory system formed part of a research study under National 
Agricultural Innovation Projects (NAIP), New Delhi. The MAAS is developed by Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras™s Rural Technol
ogy and Business Incubator and it was field 
tested with 1200 farmers in three districts of Tamil Nadu (Kancheepuram, Erode and 
Dharmapuri), India, during December 2010 to June 2012. The aim of this paper is to describe 
the experiences, highlighting a number of specific challenges and lessons associated with 
providing mobile based agricultural advisories to farmers in rural areas. 
  Keywords:
 Information and communication technology;
 Mobile phone; Agricultural 
advisory; Agricultural extension; Agricultural information; India
  1.  I
NTRODUCTION
 Agriculture is still the predominant livelihood in rural India, accounting for about 52 per cent 
of the population though its contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has decreased 
between 1990-91 and 2010-11 from 30.00 per cent to 14.50 per cent (SIA, 2012). Information 

and Communication Technologies (ICTs) play a key role in communicating knowledge and 
information to rural farming communities. ICTs include technologies and media that capture, 
store and disseminate data and information, and they include tools such as video, teletext, 
voice information systems, radio, mobile telephony, fax and computer-mediated networks 
among others.
ICTs are considered drivers of change for rural and agricultural development. 
They are efficient tools for reaching rural and remote communities and improving 
agricultural productivity (Richardson, 1997; 
Warren, 2002; Harris, 2004; May et al., 2007).  
While involving in agricultural operations, a farmer needs different types of 
information during every stage. For instance, availability of agricultural inputs and input 
prices information are most useful at planting time whereas information about improved crop 

production and management practices are mainly helpful to farmers during crop cultivation. 
Similarly, daily updates on the prices of agricultural commodities in the local markets of the 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
2surrounding district are required during harvesting time (Aker, 2011; Kapugama et al., 2011; 
Glendenning et al., 2010; Mittal, 2012).  
Fafchamps & Minten (2012) have reported that the main source of information is the 
farmer™s own observation and experimentat
ion followed by a conversation with other 
farmers. Radio and television are also the common source of information particularly on the 
weather aspects. But, Glendenning et al. (2010), who reviewed some of the agricultural 
extension approaches in India, reported that the 
majority of farmers in India have no access to 
external sources of information. So, timely advisory of agricultural information to farmers is 
of great significance for maximum yield and profitability. 
 Information and Communication Technologies have also been used in Africa to 
deliver education modules on farming practices, which are delivered by audio/radio, web-
based means, CD-ROM, video and print format (Pye, 2003; Asenso-Okyere & Mekonnen, 

2012). In Uganda, ICTs are used to disseminate local agricultural information and knowledge 
to small scale farmers (Akiiki, 2006). The Swedish government is improving delivery of farm 
services with the help of mobile phones using SMS technology, which has reached even the 
rural population of the country. Through their mobile phones, residents from these 
communities access vital information that will help them to solve issues that hinder them 

from improving their livelihood. With the similar concept of e-Governance, I-Agri Imus™s 
agricultural network was launched in Philippines. The project provided readily accessible 
information across the agriculture value chain.
 In Central Kenya, a pilot project called 
DrumNet provides marketing, financial servi
ces and information over mobile phones. While 
in Senegal, women are using telecentres (linked to the internet via mobile phones) to access 

market prices (Hafkin & Odame, 2002; Drumnet, 2007; May et al., 2007).  
In India, the existing public agricultural extension system is traditionally providing 
extension services to meet with the farmers™ requirements related to agricultural production. 

But, it has become less effective, more time 
consuming and hence unsuccessful and there is a 
gap between the extension agent and the farmers (Mruthunjaya & Adhiguru, 2005). However, 

efforts were made to strengthen the system with some innovative schemes by the Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation, Government of 
India, in collaboration with the concerned 
state government. For instance, Doordarshan is telecasting programs to make the farmer 

aware of modern technologies and research outcomes related to agriculture and its related 
areas five to six days a week through National and Regional Kendras within predefined time 
windows. Similarly, All India Radio is broadcasting 30 minutes of programme for farmers six 
days a week. Kissan Call Centres have been set up in every state of the country and all the 
centres are accessible through toll free number from 6.00 am to 10.00 pm on all seven days a 

week. Call centre agents are answering farmer™s queries in their local language. The 
department has also set up Agri clinics a
nd Agri-Business Centres to provide self 
employment opportunities for professionally qualified agricultural graduates facilitating 
delivery of value added extension services (SIA, 1012).  
In addition, several modern Information and Communication Technology based 
agricultural extension initiatives are being implemented by private, cooperatives and non-
governmental organizations. For instance, IFFCO Kissan Sanchar Limited (IKSL), BSNL, 
Reuters Market Light (RML), Nokia Life To
ols, Fisher Friend Project, Rubber Board and 
Department of Agriculture, Haryana State are providing services through SMS and Voice 
messages about agriculture related inform
ation (ICTFSECBP, 2009; Fafchamps & Minten, 
2012; Saravanan, 2010). Farmers are seeking agri
cultural related queries using their mobile 
phone (Lall & Sahi, 2009). Despite these initiatives, the farmers are still facing a lot of 
difficulties in getting timely, reli
able and relevant information. This is mainly because the 
technologies developed for farmers were not suited to the farmers™ capacity to take risk 
according to Glendenning et al. (2010) who have reviewed some ICT based agricultural 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
3services in India. Mass media like television and radio broadcast programs provide highly 
generic information rather than addressing the specific needs of individual farmers. This 

severely affects their ability to increase their productivity, profitability and income.  
According to Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, the number of wireless mobile 
phone subscribers has reached 929.37 million as on 31
st May, 2012. The share of rural 
wireless subscribers has been increasing as co
mpared to urban counterparts (TRAI, 2012). 
This is because of the availability and afford
ability of the technology. Therefore the initiative 
was designed in an appropriate manner with 
the goal of collecting and updating farm/crop 
specific information pertaining to each farmer™s field through mobile technology that would 
help the agricultural expert to analyse the situation to give right kind of advisories to farmers.  
This multimedia agricultural advisory system, which is an inexpensive technology 
tools, developed by Indian Institute of Tec
hnology Madras™s Rural Technology and Business 
Incubator (IITM™s RTBI), Chennai, was fiel
d tested in partnership with Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University (Coimbatore), National Agro Foundation (Kancheepuram), Erode 
Precision Farm Producers™ Company Ltd (Erode) and Dharmapuri Precision Farmers Agro 
Services Ltd (Dharmapuri). Three districts na
mely Kancheepuram, Erode and Dharmapuri in 
Tamil Nadu, India, have been chosen and a multimedia agricultural advisory system was used 

to provide advisories during December, 2010 to June 2012. Based on the experiences gained 
so far from this initiative, this paper has been de
signed to emphasise lessons learnt in terms of 
challenges so as to take the innovative technology to other regions as also to scale it up 
efficiently. The research question of this pape
r is that what are the challenges encountered 
and lessons learned in both the mobile phone 
based farmer™s registra
tion/farm updating and 
expert advice to farmers? The outcome of this 
study results would certainly help in further 
deployment of this technology with fewer challenges expected in the field. The rest of the 
paper is organized as follows: first we de
scribe the technology. Second, we explain 
methodology in which we describe complete na
rrative of selecting farmers for participation 
and farmers™ registration process over the mobile
 technology and the setting up of call centre 
like platform equipped with multimedia agricultural advisory system (MAAS). Third, we 
present the results and discussion and finally we conclude.  

  2.  A
N OVERVIEW OF THE 
TECHNOLOGY
 The IITM™s RTBI developed a multimedia agricultural advisory system (MAAS) which helps 
in providing timely expert advice to farmers. 
Farmer can raise a query using their mobile 
phone to an agricultural expert. When a farmer calls, a call centre like interface with 
personalized information pops up at the expert
™s end. The expert views the farmer™s 
dashboard and analyses the situation and query 
based advise is provided to the farmer. Field 
testing of MAAS essentially means to give the right kind of advisory to farmer at right time 
on their mobile phone. Figure 1 depicts the fa
rmer™s registration and information flow.  
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
4 Figure1Farmer's
registration
and
information
flow 3.  M
ETHODOLOGY
 The MAAS was field tested with 1200 farmers in Tamil Nadu (Kancheepuram, Erode and 

Dharmapuri districts), India, during December 2010 to June 2012. These three districts were 

selected for a purpose, because each of them fi
ts into one of the three agro-climatic zones. 
These are North Eastern Zone (Kancheepuram district), Western Zone (Erode district) and 
North Western Zone (Dharmapuri district) (Fig. 
2). Another reason for selecting these study 
areas was that the areas in which the project was piloted are quite contrasting in terms of their 
geographical and agricultural practice. 
        
           3.1  Selecting Farmers for Participat
ion and Farmers™ Registration Process 
Farming communities in these three districts are not homogenous. Farmers differ in social 
status, wealth, access to and control over res
ources. There were different categories of 
farmers belonging to marginal, small, medium and big based on land size. Four main 
strategies for selecting farmers to participate 
in this field testing were adopted. First, a 
strategy that was frequently used in the farmers™ selection process was to choose the 
interested farmer to register, with other farm
ers volunteering to participate in the registration 
process. The second strategy was for volunteers during awareness camp, and from them 
Figure 2 Map showing the location of study 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
5selects farmers to participate in the project. A 
third strategy used was to let farmers select 
participants within their community. In the fourth strategy, farmers were selected by 

extension staff. In all the strategies, no selection bias was followed against farmers who wish 
to participate. Nevertheless
 the farmers™ selection criteria included having a mobile phone, 
cultivating the crops chosen and willingness to take part in this project.  
A total of 1200 farmers (400 in each district) across villages in each district covering 
182 villages with an average of nearly 7 farmers per village were selected.
 Nine crops (three 
from each district) were chosen as focus crops for this field testing: paddy, groundnut & 
brinjal for Kancheepuram district; turmeric, 
sugarcane & coconut for Erode district and 
mango, tapioca & tomato for Dharmapuri district. These crops were chosen because, in all 
the three districts, they are all grown as prominent agricultural and horticultural crops. 
 Subsequent to this, an orientation progr
amme was done to create awareness about 
project goals and objectives among the farmers. The selected farmers were contacted through 
one to one interaction in their respective village and
 motivated to register through the newly 
developed mobile application using mobile phone by providing the personal profile like name 
of the farmer, gender, age, mobile number, name 
of village/block/district etc. and farm details 
such as previous/current crop cultivation practices; farm size etc. The photo of the farmer was 

also captured with camera in the mobile phone.  
All this data was transmitted using General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), which is a 
wireless data service deployed as a standard feature in many mobile phones. The GPRS 
transmits data over the mobile operator™s network to an internet gateway, further to which it 
goes to a dashboard for expert™s view and analysis. Collection of data is done on the mobile 

phone using an installed java-based application. Apart from mobile based data collection, 
GPS devices had been used for geospatial data 
like geographical location, farm size, contours 
of the land. This information was further edited
 using customized software (Photo tagger for 
Data logger tracks and Map source for Garmin 
tracks) and the developed farm plots assigned 
to individual farmers. Each farm plot is saved 
in a Shape file format 
and made available in 
dashboard. The data collected is directly stor
ed in a remote database. During the registration 
process, the farm plot details in dashboard were refined periodically based on the suggestions 
and feedback given by the farmers. The farm
ers and field level staff who facilitated the 
farmers have been given adequate training.  
 3.2  Setting up of Call Centre Like Platform Equipped with MAAS 

A multimedia agricultural advisory system was set up in IITM™s RTBI™s premise in Chennai, 

the state capital of Tamil Nadu in India and it has been functioning since December 2010. 

One agricultural expert has been engaged to answ
er the farmer™s queries as and when he/she 
contacts through the call centre number. Once the farmer submits requisite details through the 
mobile, he/she becomes a registered user in MAAS. The submitted data are available on 
concerned farmer™s dashboard. 
 The details are geographical location, farm size, contours of the land, soil physico-
chemical properties, history of the crops grow
n, inputs used, crop yields, pest and disease 
history. By presenting all this information in the context of the farmer query, the agricultural 
expert will analyze the situation and promptly provide the query based advisories in Tamil 
(the local language). 
The registered user can also upload a pictur
e of pest and disease affected crop using 
their mobile phone to the system, the expert in turn will diagnose the problem based on the 
photo submitted and timely crop specific advisory is given to the farmer on their phone. The 
details of queries by farmers, the responses pr
ovided to those queries by expert are recorded 
as call history. Further, this has helped the e
xpert to revisit the past queries and responses, 
when there were similar queries from the farmers.  
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
6The participating farmers used project mobile phone for initial registration and farm 
updates, but farmers used their own mobile phone for seeking agricultural advisory from the 

expert. From December 2010 to June 2012, enthusiastic farmers who had registered to the 
system from these three districts have been raisi
ng agricultural queries to get expert advice.  
To monitor field level activities and to provide troubleshooting support to farmers, a 
project staff was stationed at each of the study areas. This paper comes up with the basic 
understanding of registered farmers™ socio-economic characteristics such as gender, 

education, type of farmer and years of 
individual farming experience and challenges 
encountered and lessons learned during the regist
ration process and agricultural advisories to 
farmers. The data on month wise number of fa
rmers registered through mobile technology, 
their socio-economic characteristics, number of queries raised by the farmers, and type of 
queries were obtained from backend database a
nd simple descriptive analysis was used to 
interpret the results.  
    4.  R
ESULTS AND 
DISCUSSION
 In this section, we first present the number of
 farmers registered through mobile technology 
and their socio-economic characteristics, this is followed by an analysis of farmers™ queries. 

Subsequently the challenges encountered and le
ssons learnt during registration/farm updates 
and agricultural advisories to farmers are meticulously discussed.  

 
4.1  Number of Farmers Registered  
After conducting a baseline survey among the farmers followed by an orientation 
programme, the farmers were asked to register
 through newly developed mobile application 
using mobile phone. This was done because only a registered famer can raise the query to 
agricultural expert. During the registration process, the field level staff did the initial data 

collection process on behalf of the farmers. Th
e data collected were farmer™s personal profile 
such as district to which the farmers belong to
, gender, education, type of farmer and number 
of years of individual farming experience along with the farm specific information on the 
details of previous/current crop cultivation practices, farm size etc. Following this, the 
farmers were instructed and motivated to update
 the farming operations that are subsequently 
carried out after the initial registration process.
 The farmers were also instructed and taught 
how to update the information and how in case of any clarifications or doubts, they can get in 
touch with the project staff for smoot
h functioning of farm/crop updates.  
The month wise number of farmers registered through mobile technology is presented 
in figure 3. It was observed that on average 55 farmers were registered each month starting 

from April 2010 to January 2012. It took 22 months to achive the target of 1200 farmers™ 
registration (400 from each district) from all the three districts.  
The collected farmer™s personal profile and farm specific crop details during the 
registration process were viewed by the resear
cher to identify the quality of the submitted 
data. Technical team periodically checked the da
ta for errors and rectification was done in 
consultation with Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore (one of the 
partners in the project). This has facilitated the customization of both mobile application and 
dashboard application and it was made sure that the variables available in both the 

applications are synchronized with each other.  
Apart from the initial orientation programme, it was required to conduct several 
awareness kind of training programmes among the farmers to help them understand clearly 
the project goals and objectives and to enroll the 
farmers in the system. In the initial stage, we 
thought of completing the farmers registration process within a predefined time but it was not 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
7possible to do so as it required constant interaction with farmers to build rapport among the 
farmers.  
   
4.2  Socio-Economic Characteristics of Registered Farmers 

The socio-economic characteristics such as gender,
 age, education, type of farmer and years 
of individual farming experience were analysed 
and given in Table 1. It was observed that 
gender composition consists of nearly 94 per cent male farmers and only six per cent of them 
are female. About 39.90 per cent of the registered farmers were middle aged (36 Œ 45 years), 
38.80 per cent
 old (46 years and above) and 21.30 per cent young (<35 years). The analysis 
of educational background of the participating fa
rmers (Table 1) show that about 33 per cent 
of them had studied up to high school level (10
th std) while nearly 14 per cent up to higher 
secondary (12
th std), about 10 per cent had graduate
d after higher secondary school, while 
nearly 4 per cent post graduation after studying a graduation degree. Only nearly six per cent 
did not have any formal education. Since most of them are educated till either school or 

college level, we did not take up any literacy based intervention programme to make them 
aware of this initiative. The analysis of farmer
s™ classification showed that majority of them 
were small (34.80%) and medium (34.50%) fa
rmers and this was followed by marginal 
farmers (20.20%). Only 10.60 per cent of the fa
rmers were large farmers. A majority of the 
farmers (34%) had been involved in farming activities for more than 26 years. 

 Table 1 Distribution of Socio-Economic Characteristics of Registered Farmers  
Characteristics Category Frequency Percentage 
Gender  Male Female 
1127 73 93.90
6.10Age (in years) <35 Years (Young) 
36 Œ 45 years (Middle) 
>46 years (Old) 
255 479 466 21.30
39.90
38.80
Education Primary school 
Middle school 
High school 
Higher secondary school 
Graduate 
Post graduate 
162 239 
396 165 122 45 13.50
19.90

33.00
13.80
10.20
3.80Figure 1 Number of Farmers Registered th
rough Mobile Application (by Month)
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
8No education 71 5.90Classification of farmer
 Marginal (<1 ha) 
Small (1Œ2ha) 
Medium (3-5ha) 

Large (>5ha)
 242 417 414 
127 20.20
34.80
34.50

10.60
Years of farming 
experience 
0 to 5 6 to 10 11 to 15 16 to 20 21 to 25 26 & above 63 159 189 229 163 397 5.3013.30
15.80
19.10
13.60
33.10
Total 1200 100
 4.3  Farmer™s Queries  
Out of 1200 farmers who had registered with the system, only 243 farmers used the MAAS 
services provided through call centre approach giving a successful participation rate of 20.25 
per cent. The reason for poor participation might be due to lack of constant touch with 
farmers by the staff who were stationed in the field. 
It was found that totally 1183 queries 
with an average of 62 per month were raised by these farmers during December 2010 to June 
2012 from all the three districts (Fig. 4).  
The analysis of district wise queries reve
aled that farmers from Erode district (60%) 
raised more queries than the other two districts (Fig. 5). Mittal (2012) reviewed the impact on 
adoption of modern ICT tools like mobile phone by farmers in South Asia. It has been 
reported that there are several important factors 
like education, social categories, income and 
landholding size that influence the use of ICTs in decision making. Similarly, Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University based in Coimbatore ha
s also reported in one of their documentation 
reports that the farmers of Erode district are more innovative and try to adopt new innovative 
technologies it was because they regularly contacts with extension staff and agricultural 
scientists (DAP, 2008).
 The analysis of type of queries (Fig. 6) rev
ealed that plant protection with reference to 
pest and disease management (62%) and cop cultivation practices (32%) were found to be 

highest number of queries raised by the farmers. The lowest percentage of queries was on 
weather information (4%) and market information (2%). From this analysis it could be 
inferred that farmers were more concerned a
bout pest and disease management and best 
packages of crop cultivation aspects rather
 than weather and market information.  
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
9  Figure 2 Month wise number of queries 
   
     
     
   
4.4  Challenges and Lessons  

There were several challenges encountere
d and lessons learnt during farmers™ 
registration/farm updates through mobile applicati
on and expert advice to farmers. One of the 
main lessons we learnt was that the data submitted through mobile application had too many 
spelling mistakes particularly on the names of fertilizers and pesticides. To overcome this, 
questions were made available with answers in the form of drop down menu options instead 
Figure 3 Percentage of Queries by Districts 
Figure 4 Percentage of Query types 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
10of open ended questions. This has facilitated the farmers in choosing the answer and reduced 
erroneous data.  
The mobile application also had the facility of updating the information on farming 
operations that are carried out between sowing to harvesting of the crops, but this was not 
used by most of the farmers. It was learnt that the level of English literacy was abysmally 
poor among the farmers and that the content over mobile application needed to be in the local 
language (Tamil) to gain wide usage by the famers. To overcome this challenge, the expert 

from the call centre contacted the farmers over phone and updated the information in the 
concerned farmer™s dashboard by asking questions. But, this took considerable time for the 
expert rather than spending valuable time on providing agricultural advisories to farmers.  
On learning difficulties faced by farmers during farm updates, the project team has 
developed an Interactive Voice Response (IVR) system in Tamil (the local language), which 

may eliminate the language barrier and enable the farmer to keep updating the farming 
operations as and when they undertake them in their respective fields. IVR is emerging to be 
the most appropriate solution to the defined digital inclusion problem. This voice technology 
allows representations that are closest to the natural human language and does not require any 
level of literacy. However, Ganesan et al. (2012), who reviewed the challenges in 

implementing mobile phone based data collection in developing countries, reported that there 
are expected voice input errors due to low accuracy of the speech recognizer and noise 
background environments in IVR.  
Apart from this, the project team has also developed a pest and disease image upload 
application over mobile phone in a local language (Tamil). This can be used for uploading 

pest and disease affected plant over mobile phone for seeking advisories from the expert. 
Both these newly developed technologies will be implemented in due course to help in 
regular updates from the farmers™ field.  
The other challenges we faced was that some of the farmers showed disinterest in 
registration over mobile technology during the initial stage. It was learnt that no crops which 

were chosen in the project were being cultivated in their lands due to unseasonal conditions. 
This had resulted in unwillingness for those who do not have crops in their field at the time of 
registration. Hence, the project team had to wait till the farmers start getting involved in the 

cultivation of crops in their respective fields. In
 view of this, there was considerable delay in 
completing the registration process for all the participating farmers within the timeframe set 
in the timeline.  
Similarly, most of the farmers showed disinterest in the use of service during 
agricultural advisories. It was learnt that 
the information provided lacked quality, was not 
timely provided and the information was irreleva
nt and unreliable. The information provided 
to them was mainly on best practices for crop production rather than focussing on 
information about postharvest aspects including processing, marketing, storage and handling. 
Motivation among the farmers played a crucial factor but, this was not adopted by the staff 
from the field at appropriate time when they n
eed the information. There was also lack of 
coordination between the agricultural expert, fiel
d staff and farmers. Another reason might be 
due to the farmers requiring a diversified inform
ation needs to support their farm enterprise. 
It was also noted that lack of expert™s knowledge
 particularly in pest and disease related areas 
played major role in decreasing the number of calls from the farmers. It was also found that 
there was a lack of farmers™ participation in
 the project due to poor rapport building by the 
staff who were stationed in the field. On observing this, the respective field level staff was 
instructed to meet with every farmer on daily basis but this was not possible for three field 
staff as each of them was assigned 400 farmers 
in the respective districts. Another challenge 
was that each of the farmers™ field were sca
ttered around and were located with a minimum 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
11distance of 20 to 25 km radius. As a result, number of queries decreased over period of time 
inspite of considerable number of farmers registered. 
The field level staff also faced a lot of diffi
culties in reaching the farmers field by foot 
as frequent transport facilities were not available in many of the villages. On some occasions, 
farmers who had two wheeler facility voluntarily 
came forward to help the field staff to take 
him/her to the field but this could not be expected at all the times. This has posed as one of 
the main challenges in this initiative. 
During the queries from farmers to expert fo
r advisories, the expert was not able to 
provide weather forecasting information at village specific location to farmers. This 
information was sought by farmers because it would help them make crop management 
decision which could reduce risk and losses due 
to extreme climate. The agricultural expert 
tried to collect weather related information from the website of agricultural universities and 

meteorological related institutes but there was no village level specific forecasting 
information available and instead block level information was delivered directly to farmers.  
Soil testing is one of the important agricultural practices to be followed by farmers to 
meet with the nutrient requirement of different crops before the start of the crop cultivation in 
their respective farm land. The results of the soil testing help the expert to calculate and 

provide accurate recommendations to farmers that 
will assist them in integrated management 
of their farm. But we learnt during the agricultural advisories that the majority of the farmers, 
who had asked for fertilizer recommendation, did not go for soil testing. It was for this reason 
that the expert could provide only general fe
rtilizer recommendation rather than the accurate 
recommendation to farmers.  
Interestingly, the farmers who were not registered to the system also contacted the 
expert for agricultural advisory. It might be be
cause some of the farmers, who had registered, 
shared the benefits of advisories received fro
m an agricultural expert. Similarly, farmers 
raised a query for the crops which were not focused on in this initiative. All this shows the 

farmers™ enthusiasm to seek advisories from the expert. One of the hurdles we faced was that 

different subject matter specialists were not e
ngaged at the call centre when advisories were 
provided to the farmers. This has clearly affect
ed the advisory part when there was a query 
about very specific subject related questions. Fo
r example one of the farmers raised a query 
on animal husbandry and dairy related aspects. The expert could not answer directly to 
farmers; instead this query was communicated to a specialist who was actually not part of this 
initiative. We are developing a multiparty c
onferencing system to incorporate into MAAS 
whereby different subject matter specialists (Agronomist, Pathologist, Entomologist, 
Livestock veterinarian, Insurance specialist etc) could be interlinked through mobile phone 

with farmers directly.  
 5.  C
ONCLUSIONS
 In this paper, we have reported the results of a field testing of Multimedia Agricultural 

Advisory System (MAAS). It is an innovative technology whereby the agricultural expert 

delivers the advice by analyzing the actual situations on the dashboard rather than visiting the 
field and viewing the crop in person. The agricultural advisory information is expected to 
help farmers to adopt improved crop production techniques for increasing the yield of the 
crops.  The field testing was conducted in collaboration with Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University, National Agro Foundation, Erode Precision Farm Producers™ Company Ltd and 
Dharmapuri Precision Farmers Agro Services Ltd. The field testing involved 1200 farmers in 
three districts of Tamil Nadu (Kancheepuram, 
Erode and Dharmapuri), India. Participating 
farmers registered through newly developed 
mobile applications and subsequently, we 
motivated farmers for updating of farm information to seek expert™s timely advice. The 
EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
12question that is discussed in this paper is as follows. ﬁWhat are the challenges encountered 
and lessons learnt in both the mobile phone ba
sed farmer™s registra
tion/farm updating and 
expert advice to farmers?ﬂ  
This paper elaborates various challenges while field testing of MAAS and some of the 
key challenges are discussed here. For instance, most of the farmers were not able to update 
the information on farming operations through mobile applications at regular intervals. One 
of the reasons may be due to language gap in terms of the medium of the language as 

reported by May et al. (2007). Most of the registered farmers showed disinterest in the use of 
service during the period of time. This may be because the information provided to farmers 
lack relevant services that might not meet with information needs of the farmers, resulting in 
low usage. Glendenning et al. (2007) who have reviewed agricultural extension in India 
reported that information needs will differ from farmer to farmer based on landholding size 

and farmer required diversified range
 of information. So, there is a need to focus in the future 
to understand what is exactly obstructing the usage of MAAS and the relevance of 
information provided.  
Despite several challenges, the project has been able to accomplish enrolling 1200 
farmers (400 from each district) in the multimedia agricultural advisory system using mobile 

application. Enthusiastic farmers have contacted the call centre during at every stage of crop 
growth for agricultural advisory purpose. The project was also successful in refining and in 
customization of a user friendly dashboard application. Apart from this, the farmers 
participating in the project have acquired enough knowledge on how to register themselves 
using mobile technology and contact the expert at the call centre for seeking advisory. The 

farmers were able to get timely and right adviso
ries to successfully control pest and disease. 
They were also able to adopt improved crop production techniques and management practices 
during crop cultivation, which contributed to incr
eased the yield of the crop. These results are 
in line with IFFCO Kissan Sanchar Limited 
(IKSL), Reuters Market Light (RML), Nokia 
Life Tools and Fisher Friend Project who are providing services through SMS and Voice 

messages about agriculture related inform
ation (ICTFSECBP, 2009; Fafchamps & Minten, 
2012; Saravanan, 2010).  
Based on lessons learnt during the field testing of MAAS, and we find some of the key 
challenges need to be given greater attention during further deployment of this technology 
among the farmers in rural areas: 
- regular updates of farm/crop specific information by farmers 
- timely motivation of farmers by project stakeholders 
- providing village level location specific we
ather forecasting information to farmers  
- incorporating multiparty conferencing system into MAAS to facilitate interlinking 
with different subject matter specialists and farmers 
The major contribution of this paper is to share the experiences gained so far in terms of 
challenges encountered and lessons learnt during the field testing of MAAS. All the 
challenges discussed in this paper must be take
n into consideration for further deployment of 
this technology in order to be effectively implemented among the farmers in rural areas. 
Further research should focus on testing the effect of MAAS on the performance of 
agricultural crop yield by adopting a randomized controlled trial (CRT). For example, two 
treatments can be implemented. Treatment 1, 
all the participating farmers are offered MAAS 
services; Treatment 2, a proportionate number of farmers are not offered any of MAAS 

service and it should be treated as control. 
Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) have shown that, in 
randomization controlled trials, stratification 
improves efficiency. Thus, randomization of 
treatments across villages in each district can be implemented in future.  
  EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
136.  R
EFERENCES
 Aker, J.C. (2011) Dial A for Agriculture: A Review of Information and Communication 
Technologies for Agricultural Exte
nsion in Developing Countries. 
CGD Working 
Paper 269, Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development
, http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/1425497
  Akiiki, E.K.
 (2006) Towards improving farmers™ livelihoods through exchange of local 
agricultural content in rural Uganda. 
Knowledge Management for Development 
Journal
, 2(1), 68-77, 
http://journal.km4dev.org/index.php/km4dj/article/viewFile/53/90
  Asenso-Okyere, K. Mekonnen, D.A. (2012) The Importance of ICTs in the Provision of 
Information for Improving Agricultural Productivity and Rural Incomes in Africa. 
Working paper, United Nations Development Programme, Regional Bureau for 
Africa, http://web.undp.org/africa/knowledge/WP-2012-015-okyere-mekonnen-ict-
productivity.pdf
 Bruhn, M. and McKenzie, D. (2009) In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in 
Development Field Experiment. 
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
, 1(4): 200-232 DAP (District Agriculture Plan), Erode District. (2008) National Agricultural Development 
Programme. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
DrumNet. (2007)
 Financing the Agricultural Value Supply Chain. 
A Project of Pride Africa
. http://www.ruralfinance.org/fileadmin/templates/rflc/documents/1176485707833_Dru
mNet_final.pdf
  Fafchamps M. and Minten. B. (2012) Impact
 of SMS-Based Agricultural Information on 
Indian Farmers, The World Bank Economic Review. 
Published by Oxford University 
Press on behalf of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
, 1-32, http://wber.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2012/02/27/wber.lhr056.full.pdf+html
  Ganesan, M., Suma, P. and Ashok, J. (2012) A Review on Challenges in Implementing 
Mobile Phone Based Data Collection in Developing Countries. 
The Journal of Health 
Informatics in Developing Countries
, 5(1), 366-374, 
http://www.jhidc.org/index.php/jhidc/article/view/77/114
  Glendenning, C.J., Babu, S. and Asenso-Okyere, K. (2010) Review of Agricultural Extension 
in India, Are Farmers™ Information Needs Being Met?. 
IFPRI Discussion Paper 
01048, http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp01048.pdf
  Hafkin, N.J and Odame, H.H..
 (2002) Gender, ICTs and Agriculture. 
A Situation Analysis for 
the 5th Consultative Expert Meeting of CTA™s ICT Observatory Meeting on Gender 
and Agriculture in the Information Society
. http://www.cta.int/observatory2002/ 
background_paper.pdf
 Harris, R.W.
 (2004) Information and Communication Technologies for Poverty Alleviation
. Kuala Lumpur: UNDP, Asia-Pacific D
evelopment Information Programme.  
ICTFSECBP (Information Communication Technology For Small Enterprise Capacity 
Building Program) (2009) 
Final Report September 29, 2006 Œ September 28, 2009, 
USAID from the American People 
Kapugama N., Lokanathan, S. and Perera, R.
S. (2011) Improving Farmer Services by 
Understanding their Information Needs. 
http://www.cprsouth.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/Policy-brief_finalV3.pdf
 Lall, A. and Sahi, S. (2009) Taking ICTs to the Grassroots. A Case Study of the LifeLines 
India Initiative, 19,1
 http://www.iimahd.ernet.in/egov/ifip/feb2009/anusha-lall.htm
 EJISDC (2013) 56, 5, 1-14 
The Electronic Journal of Informatio
n Systems in Developing Countries 
www.ejisdc.org
14May, J., Karugia, J. and Ndokweni, M. (2007)
 Information and Communication Technologies 
and Agricultural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa: Transformation and 

Employment Generation. 
Final Framework Paper prepared for the African Economic 
Research Consortium (AERC)
, http://www.aercafrica.org/documents/ 
ict_project_working_papers/ mayet_al_ictagriculturaldevelopmentinssa.pdf
 Mittal, S. (2012) Modern ICT for Agricultural Development and Risk Management in 
Smallholder Agriculture in India. 
Socio Economics Working Paper 3
, http://www.scribd.com/doc/102434893/18/Table-6-Example-of-a-crop-calendar-for-
wheat-crop
 Mruthunjaya and Adhiguru, A. (2005) ICT 
for Livelihood Security: A Reality Check. 
Mainstreaming ICTs
, II (2), 14-18. 
Pye, D. (2003)
 Using ICT to Increase the Effectiveness of Community-Based, Non-Formal 
Education for Rural People in Sub-Saharan Africa, 
The CERP Project Final Report,
 http://www.dfid.gov.uk/r4d/PDF/Outputs/TechDistLearn/paper50.pdf
 Richardson, D. (1997) The Internet and Rural and Agricultural Development Œ An Integrated 
Approach. FAO Corporate Document Repository
, http://www.fao.org/ 
docrep/w6840e/w6840e00.htm
 Saravanan, R. (2010) India, In: Saravanan 
(Ed.) ICTs for Agricultural Extension: Global 
Experiments, Innovations and Experiences. 
New India Publishing Agency (NIPA), 
New Delhi
, 115-168 
SIA (State of Indian Agriculture) (2012)
http://agricoop.nic.in/SIA111213312.pdf
 TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India) (2012) 
http://www.trai.gov.in/
  Warren, M.F. (2002) Adoption of ICT in Agricultural Management in the United Kingdom: 
The Intra-Rural Digital Divide. 
Agricultural Economics
, 48(1), 1-8, http://www.cazv.cz/2003/2002/ekon1_02/warren.pdf
  