WP
-
2012
-
0
1
4
 
 
Small Farmers in India:
 
Challenges and Opportunities
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.Mahendra Dev
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai
 
June
 
2012
 
http://www.igidr.ac.in/pdf/publication/WP
-
2012
-
01
4
.pdf
 
WP
-
2012
-
0
1
4
 
 
Small Farmers in India:
 
Challenges and Opportunities
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.Mahendra Dev
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai
 
June
 
2012
 
http://www.igidr.ac.in/pdf/publication/WP
-
2012
-
01
4
.pdf
 
Small Farmers in India:
 
Challenges and Opportunities
 
 
 
 
 
S.Mahendra Dev
 
 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR)
 
General Arun Kumar Vaidya Marg
 
Goregaon (E), Mumbai
-
 
400065, INDIA
 
Email (corresponding author):
 
profmahendra@igidr.ac.in
 
 
 
 
Abstract
 
 
 
This 
paper examines the roles and challenges of small holding agriculture in India. It covers 
trends in agricultural growth, cultivation patterns, participation of small holding agriculture, 
productivity performance of small holders, linking small holders with 
markets including 
value chains, role of small holders in enhancing food security and employment generation, 
differential policies and institutional support for small holders and, challenges and future 
options for small holding agriculture including informa
tion needs.  It also provides lessons 
from the experience of India on small holding agriculture for other countries.
 
 
 
Keywords:
 
Small and marginal farmers, food security, livelihoods, value chains, institutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i
 
1
 
 
Small 
Farmers 
in India: 
 
Challenges and Opportunities
1
 
 
S.Mahendra Dev
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION
 
AND BACKGROUND
 
 
Agriculture plays a pivotal role in the Indian economy. Although its contribution to gross 
domestic product (GDP) is now around one sixth, it provides e
mployment to 56 per cent of the 
Indian workforce. Also, the forward and backward linkage effects of agriculture growth increase 
the incomes in the non
-
agriculture sector. The growth of some commercial crops has significant 
potential for promoting exports o
f agricultural commodities and bringing about faster 
development of agro
-
based industries. Thus agriculture not only contributes to overall growth of 
the economy but also reduces poverty by providing employment and food security to the 
majority of the popu
lation in the country and thus it is the most inclusive growth sectors of the 
Indian economy.
 
The 12
th
 
Five Year Plan Approach Paper also indicates that agricultural 
development is an important component of faster, more inclusive sustainable growth approac
h. 
 
 
The structural reforms and stabilization policies introduced in India in 1991 initially focused on 
industry, tax reforms, foreign trade and investment, banking and capital markets. 
The economic 
reforms did not include any specific package specifically
 
designed for agriculture
. 
In the post
-
reform (since 1991) period, India has done well in some indicators such as economic growth, 
exports, balance of payments, resilience to externa
l shocks, service sector growth, 
significant 
accumulation of foreign excha
nge, Information technology (IT) and stock market, improvements 
in telecommunications etc
. 
GDP growth was around 8 to 9% per annum in the period 2004
-
05 to 
2007
-
08. India is 
now 2
 
trillion dollar economy. Investment and savings rates were quite high 32 
to 
36%.
 
 
However, 
there have been exclusion problems in the country. 
In other words, real development 
in terms of growth shared by all sections of the population has not taken place. We have 
problems of poverty, unemployment, inequalities in access to health 
and education and poor 
per
formance of agriculture sector.
 
One of the excluded sector during the reform period was 

concerns on the performance of agriculture secto
r in the country. The post
-
reform growth was 
led by services. Commodity sector growth (agriculture+industry) has not been higher in the post
-
reform period as compared to that of 1980s. Particular worry is agriculture sector which showed 
lower than 2% per a
nnum
 
in the decade of mid
-
1990s to mid
-
2000s
.
 
There are also concerns on 
food security and livelihoods.
 
 
 
Small holdings agriculture which is the focus of this paper is important for raising agriculture 
growth, food security and livelihoods
 
in India
. 
It ma
y be noted that Indian agriculture
 
is the 
home of small 
and marginal 
farmers (80%).
 
Therefore, the future of sustainable agriculture 
growth and food security in India depends on the performance of small and marginal farmers
. 
                                        
                  
 
1
 

Em
erging Economies Research Dialogue

-
15 November 2011 organized 
by ICRIER.
 
2
 
 
Agricult
ural Census data shows 
that there
 
were about 121 million agricultural holdings in India 
in 2000
-
01.  Around 99 million were small and marginal  farmers.
 
 
Average size has declined 
from 2.3 ha. In 1970
-
71 to 1.37 ha. In 2000
-
01
. 
Small and marginal farmers account for more 
than 80
% of total farm hhs. But their share in operated area is around 44%. 
Thus, there are
 
significant land inequalities
 
in India.
 
 
 
The role of small farms in development and poverty reduction is well recognized (Lipton, 2006). 
The global experience of growth a
nd poverty reduction
 
shows that GDP growth originating in 
agriculture
 
is at least twice as eff
ective in reducing poverty as
 
GDP growth originating outside 
agriculture
 
(WDR, 2008). 
Small holdin
gs play important role in raisi
ng agricultural development 
and p
overty reduction.
 
 
The objective of this paper is to examine the role and challenges of small holding agricult
ure
 
in 
achieving agricultural growth, 
food security and livelihoods in India. The paper also shows that 
market oriented reforms are not sufficient
 
and government intervention and other support are 
needed for small holdings to achieve the 
above 
goals
. It is known that
 
small farmers 
face 
several 
challenges in the access to inputs
 
and marketing
.
 
They need a level playing field with large farms 
in terms
 
of accessing land, water, inputs, credit, technology and markets. 
 
 
Small holdings also face new challenges on integration of value chains, liberalization and 
globalization effects, market volatility and other risks and vulnerability, adaptation of climat
e 
chang

-
wide processes of farm change 

 
commercialisation of increasing proportions of input and output: institutional developments such 
as super markets; privatization of key aspects of technical progress, and 
of output and process 
grades and standards 

 

needed for small holdings in the context of these world
-
wide processes of farm change. 
There are 
also high returns from investments in a
gricultural R&d, rural roads
 
and other infrastructure and 
knowledge generation.
 
 
The paper is
 
organized as follows. Section 3 gives a brief background on agricultural growth and 
policies on agriculture. Section 3 
 
examines the roles and challenges of small
 
holding agriculture 
in India. It covers trends in agricultural growth, cultivation patterns, participation of small 
holding agriculture, productivity performance of small holders, linking small holders with 
markets, 
role of small holders in enhancing food
 
security and employment generation, 
differential policies and institutional support for small holders and, challenges and future options 
for small holding agriculture includ
ing information needs. Section 4
 
provides lessons from the 
experience of India on 
small holding agriculture for other countries.
 
 
2. BACKGROUND
 
 
One of the paradoxes of the Indian economy is that the decline in the share of agricultural 
workers in total workers has been slower than the decline in the share of agriculture in the GDP. 
For
 
example, the share of agriculture and allied activities in the GDP declined from 57.7 per cent 
in 1950

1 to 15.7 per cent in 2008

9 (Table 1). The share of agriculture in total workers, 
however, declined slowly from 75.9 per cent in 1961 to 56.4 per cent 
in 2004
-
05 (Table 1).
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
Between 1961 and 2004
-
05, there was a decline of 34 percentage points in the share of 
agriculture in GDP while the decline in share of agriculture in employment was of only 19.5 
percentage points. As a result, the gap between labou
r productivity in agriculture and non
-
agriculture increased rapidly.
 
 
In terms of growth, the performance of agriculture in the post
-
Independence era has been 
impressive as compared to the pre
-
Independence period. The all crop output growth of around 
2.57 
per cent per annum in the post
-
Independence period (during 1949

50 to 2007
-
8) was much 
higher than the negligible growth rate of around 0.4 per cent per annum in the first half of the last 
century. As a result, India achieved significant gains in food grai
ns and non
-
food grain crops. 
 
 
The highest growth rate of GDP from agriculture and allied activities of 3.9 per cent per annum 
in recent years was recorded in the period 1992
-
3 to 1996
-
71 (Table 2). If we look at decadal 
average 1980s recorded the highest 
growth rate of more than 3 per cent per annum. In the post
-
reform period, it declined to 2.76 per cent per annum. The deceleration in the growth rate of 
GDP from agriculture between the first half of the 1990s and the later period is glaring. It is 
disquie
ting to note that during the 1997

8 to 2004

5, agriculture growth was only 1.6 per cent 
per annum (Table 2). Fortunately, it recorded growth of 3.5 per cent per annum during 2004
-
05 
to 2010
-
11. 
12
th
 
Five Year Plan (20012
-
17) aims to achieve 4% growth in ag
riculture.
 
Significant fluctuation in growth of agriculture is a matter of concern
 
(Fig1)
. 
 
 
Extensive cultivation has characterized Indian agriculture during the pre
-
1965 era, and intensive 
cultivation in the post
-
green revolution period. There has been s
ignificant increase in the use of 
modern inputs in Indian agriculture. During the period 1950

1 to 2003

4, the percentage of net 
irrigated area to net cultivated area increased from around 17 to 41. During the same period, 
fertilizer consumption showed a s
ignificant rise from less than 1 kg/ha to 90 kg/ha. Similarly, the 
percentage of area under high yielding varieties (HYVs) to cereals cropped area has risen from 
15 in 1970

1 to 75 in the late 1990s. The share of agriculture in electricity consumption also
 
rose 
from 4 per cent in 1950

1 to nearly 30 per cent in recent years. All this led to a significant 
increase in agricultural output over time. 
 
 
It may be noted
 

central go
vernment plays a crucial role in shaping agricultural policies. Although Indian
 
agriculture is in private hands, government policies have greatly influenced its pace and 
character.
 
 
Broadly, agricultural development policies over time can be divided into f
our sets of policy 
packages: (a) institutional reforms; (b) public investment policies; (c) incentive policies; and (d) 
reforms and globalization policies. The relative importance of the first three sets has varied over 
time. 
 
 
Thus, during the first three
 
Five Year Plans (1950

65), the institutional reforms and public 
investment packages dominated. The central and state governments enacted a number of laws 
regarding land reforms. These laws mainly relate to three aspects: abolition of zamindari system, 
lan
d ceiling and redistribution of land, and tenancy reforms. The government was successful in 
abolishing the zamindari or intermediary system after paying compensation to the zamindars. 
4
 
 
The land ceiling laws were not effective although there was redistributi
on of some land to the 
beneficiaries. The tenancy reforms were more successful in two states, West Bengal in the east 
and Kerala in the south, than in others. West Bengal succeeded in giving ownership rights to 
tenants, particularly sharecroppers (
bargarda
r
s). Some efforts were made to consolidate 
fragmented holdings in India since Independence. In some parts of north and north
-
west India 
these efforts were relatively successful. 
 
 
There was significant public investment in agriculture during 1950

65. To ac
hieve the objective 
of self
-
sufficiency in food grains, there was massive investment particularly in constructing 
irrigation reservoirs and distribution systems. Another important policy during this period was 
the expansion of institutional credit which he
lped reduce informal sources that had been 
exploitative in respect of interest rates and terms and conditions. 
 
 
During the 1967

90 period, incentive policies for adoption of new technology and public 
investment policies dominated government strategy in ag
riculture. After the humiliating 
experience with import of food grains in the mid
-
1960s, there was a vigorous drive for achieving 
self
-
sufficiency in food grains by stepping up public investment in irrigation and introduction of 
new technology through ince
ntives. There was a need to increase domestic food production at a 
faster rate by much higher productivity without upsetting the agrarian structure. Luckily at that 
time new high
-
yielding dwarf varieties of wheat and rice were available in Mexico and the 
P
hilippines respectively. Yields increased significantly for wheat initially and later for rice. This 

associated with the green revolution is best described as forest
-
 
o
r land
-
saving agriculture. It may 
be noted that without the green revolution it would not have been possible to lift the production 
potential of Indian agriculture.
 
 
 
Incentive policies focused on both inputs and output. Subsidies for inputs like irrigatio
n, credit, 
fertilizers, and power increased significantly in the 1970s and 1980s. The objective of the 
subsidies is to provide inputs at low prices to protect farmer interests and encourage diffusion of 
new technology. Similarly, on the output side, there 
has been a comprehensive long
-
term 
procurement
-
cum
-
distribution policy in the post
-
green revolution period. The government 
announces the support prices at sowing time and agrees to buy all the grains offered for sale at 
this price. To support these operati
ons, institutions like the Food Corporation of India (FCI) and 
the Agricultural Prices Commission (APC) were established in the mid
-
1960s. 
 
 
In the post
-
reform period, economic reforms in India since 1991 have improved the incentive 
framework and agricultu
re has benefited from reduction in protection to industry. The terms of 
trade for agriculture have improved and private investment has increased. Export of 
commodities, particularly cereals, has risen and there has been some progress on market reforms 
in t
erms of removing domestic and external controls. However, there were also concerns about 
agriculture and food security in the 1990s. There has been emphasis on price factors at the cost 
of non
-
price factors like research and extension, irrigation, and cred
it. Economic reforms have 
largely neglected the agricultural sector and only in the last few years have domestic and external 
trade reforms in the sector started. 
 
 
5
 
 
Trade policies in India during the last five decades have been highly interventionist and 
d
iscriminating against agriculture. There has been pessimism regarding international trade in 
agriculture. 
 
 
Trade liberalization in agriculture has been faster towards the end of the 1990s in tune with WTO 
agreements. There has been considerable progress i
n the liberalization of export controls, and 
quantitative controls on imports and on decontrol of domestic trade. 
The 11
th
 
Five Year Plan 

th
 
Plan is its target of 
4 per cent per annum growth in GDP from agriculture and allied sectors. A 
detailed agenda for action is spelt out in Mid
-
term appraisl of 11
th
 
Five Year Plan
 
covering 
improved access to water, improvement in the supply of good quality seeds, replenishment 
of 
soil nutrients, improvements in agricultural research and extension, reforms in land tenancy and 
improvements in agricultural marketing which is particularly important for perishable produce. 
The 12
th
 
Five Year Plan is going to focus on small and margin
al farmers and resource poor 
regions. 
 
 
3. 
ROLES
,
 
CHALLENGES 
AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
 
SMALL HOLDING 
AGRICULTURE IN INDIA
 
In this section, we examine the role, challenges, policies and opportunities for small holding 
agriculture in India. 
India is a big countr

closer to that of Europe. Therefore, there is also a need to look at regional level to bring out the 
variations.
 
 
3.1. Role of Small Holding Agriculture
 
 
Structure of land holdings
: 
India is a land o
f small farmers. According to
 
Agricultural Census 
2000
-
01, there were an estimated 98
 
milli
on small and marginal holdings out of around 120 
million total land
 
households in 
the country. As shown in Table 3
, the share of marginal and 
small farmers accounted
 
for around 81% of operational holdings 
in 2002
-
03 
as compared to 
about 62% in 1960
-
61. Similarly, the area operated by small and marginal farmers has increased 
from about 19% to 44% during the same period. 
Recent data for 2005
-
06 shows that the share of 
s
mall and marginal farmers 
in land holdings 
was 83%
 
(Chand et al, 2011)
. 
Thus, the small 
holding character of Indian agriculture is much more prominent today than even before.
 
The average size of holdings in India declined from
 
2.3 ha. in 1970
-
71 to 1.33
 
ha
. in 2000
-
01.
 
It 
may be noted that 63% of land holdings belong to marginal farmers with less than 1 ha. The 
average size of marginal holdings 
is only 0.24 at all India level. 
The average size of small 
holdings is 1.42 ha. 
Table 4
 
shows average size of hold
ings by farm size. The average size of 
marginal holdings varies from 0.14 ha. in Kerala to 0.63 ha. in Punjab. 
  
 
 
Access to
 
Irrigation
: 
The access to irrigation has increased for all categories of farmers. 
It 
is the 
highest for marginal farmers followed b
y small farmers. 
Table 5
 
indicates that the percentage of 
area under irrigation for small farmers increased from 40 in 1980
-
81 to 51 in 2000
-
01. 
On the 
other hand, for large farmers it rose from 16 to 31% during the same period. It may, however, be 
noted t
hat large farmers capitalize on cheaper sources like canals while small farmers have to 
rent water. About 40 per cent of the irrigated are for large farmers was from canals while it was 
less than 25 per cent in the case of small and marginal farmers (NCEUS
, 2008). 
 
 
6
 
 
Access to Fertilizers
 
and Area under HYV
: 
The fertilizer per hectare is inversely related to farm 
size for both irrigated and unirrigated areas (
Table 6
). It increased from marginal farmers in 
irrigated areas from 100 kgs. in 1980
-
81 to 252 kgs.
 
in 2001
-
02. In fact, the per hectare 
consumption for all farm sizes was similar on irrigated areas in 1981
-
82 but it rose faster for 
marginal farmers and small farmers in 2001
-
02. 
This is true in the case of unirrigated areas also.
 
 
Similarly, the percent
age of area under high yielding varieties (HYV) is also inversely related to 
farm size (Table 7). In the irrigated areas, the coverage of are under HYV was 89%, 86% and 
78% respectively in marginal, small and large farmers in 2001
-
02. In the case of unirri
gated 
areas, the coverage was above 50% for marginal, small and semi
-
medium but it was only 30% 
for large farmers in 2001
-
02.
 
 
 
Cropping Intensity
:
 
Multiple cropping index is higher for marginal and small farmers than that 
for medium and large farmers. For
 
marginal farmers, cropping intensity increased from 134 in 
1981
-
82 to 139 in 2001
-
02 (Table 8). In the case of large farmer, it rose from 116 to 121 during 
the same period. The differences across farm sizes persisted over time.
 
 
Cropping Patterns
: 
Do 
smal
l 
and marginal 
farmers 
grow high value crops? Table 
9
 
shows 
cropping patterns by size of farms. Birthal et al (2011) provide four conclusions from these 
cropping patterns: (a) small and marginal farmers allocate larger proportion of their cultivated 
land t
o high value crops like fruits, and vegetables ; (b) small and marginal farmers seem to have 
comparative advantage in growing vegetables than fruits because of quick returns in the former; 
(c) small and marginal farmers allocate larger proportion of rice a
nd wheat than other farmers; 
(d) small and marginal farmers allocate lower proportion of land to pulses and oilseeds.   
 
 
Farm Size, output and productivity
:
 
The contribution to output is higher for marginal and small 
farmers as compared to their share in 
area. The share of these farmers was 46.1% in land 
possessed but they contribute 51.2% to the total output of the country (Fig 2 and Table 10) at all 
India level in 2002
-
03. There are significant regional variation
s
 
in their contribution to output. 
The sha
re of output is less than the operated area in ten states (Table 10). In rest of the states, the 
reverse was true. The contribution of small and marginal farmers to output ranges from 19% in 
Punjab to 86% in West Bengal. It is less than 50% in 9 out of 20 
states. In the Estern states, the 
share of both area and output are high for these farmers. On the other hand, in some of the states 
in Central, Western and North
-
Western regions, medium and large farmers still dominate in both 
area and output.
 
 
In terms o
f production, small and marginal farmers also make larger contribution to the 
production of high value crops. They contribute around 70% to the total production of 
vegetables, 55% to fruits against their share of 44% in land area (Birthal, 2011). Their sha
re in 
cereal production is 52% and 69% in milk production. 
Thus, small farmers contribute to both 
diversification and food security.
 
Only in the cases of pulses and oilseeds, their share is lower 
than other farmers.  
 
 
There has been debate in India on the
 
relationship between farm size and productivity. The 

produce more in value terms per hectare than the medium and large farms. Fig 3 show
s
 
that 
value of output 
per hectare was Rs.14754 for marginal farm
ers, Rs.13001 for small farmers, Rs. 
7
 
 
10655 for medium farmers and Rs.8783 for large farmers. 
It shows that from efficiency point 
of view, small holdings are equal or better than large holdings.
 
Table 11 indicates l
arge 
regional variations in the value of output per hectare. For marginal farmers, it varies from 
Rs.29448 in Punjab to Rs.7177 in Rajasthan. This is also true for large medium and large farmers 

 
it ranges from Rs.28983 in Punjab to Rs.4213 in Rajasthan. 
In many states, small holdings 
have higher value of output per hectare than large farms. However, in the case of states like, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the large farms 
have higher productivity (in value terms) 
than marginal farmers. In the case of Punjab, the 
differences in productivity are not large across farm sizes.
 
 
 
3.2. Small Holders and Livelihoods
 
We have mentioned above that 98 million out of total 120 million farm holdings are small and 
marginal farmer
s. The sustainability of these farmers is crucial for livelihoods in rural areas and 
for the entire country. It is true that small holdings have higher productivity than medium and 
large farms. But, as our discussion below shows that it is not enough to co
mpensate for the 
disadvantage of 
the small area of holdings. The cost of cultivation per hectare is also high on 
small and marginal farmers than medium and large farms (Table 12). At the all India level, net 
farm income per hectare for small holdings is hi
gher than large holdings (Table 13).
 
The data at 
state level shows that in 9 out of 20 states, the reverse is true 

 
net farm income per hectare is in 
large holdings higher than small holdings
2
.
 
 
However, the monthly income and consumption figures across d
ifferent size class of land 
holdings show that marginal and small farmers have dis
-
savings compared to medium and large 
farmers. 
The average monthly income of farmer households is comprised of income from wages, 
net receipts from cultivation, net receipts 
from farming of animals and income from non
-
farm 
business. The average monthly consumption of farmer households is comprised of total food and 
non
-
food expenditure. 
 
 
According to NSS 
2003 data, the monthly consumption of marginal farmers was Rs.2482 and 
m
onthly income was Rs.1659
 
(Table 14 and Fig 4.1)
. It shows that they have 
dis
-
savings of 
Rs.823. The dis
-
savings for small farmers were Rs.655. On the other hand, for large farmers, 
monthly income and consumption respectively were Rs.9667 and Rs.6418 with 
savings of 
Rs.3249. Table 14 and Figs 4.2 to 4.7 provide
s
 
state wise details on monthly income and 
consumption according to farm size. 

consumption expenditure of 
marginal and small farmers exceeds their estimated income by a substanti
al margin and 
presumably the deficits have to be plugged by borrowing or other means

 
(p.12). NCEUS (2008) 
also indicates that the poverty for small holding farmers is much higher than other farmers. The 
need for increase in productivity and incomes of sma
ll holdings and promotion of non
-
farm 
activities for these farmers are obvious. 
 
 
 
3.3. Issues and Challenges for Small Holders
 
There are many issues and challenges for small holding agriculture in India. 

survey of 2003 brought out many issues
 
relating to small and marginal farmers. Based on this 

-
small 
farmers as agriculturalists are: imperfect markets for inputs/product leading to smaller value 
                                        
                  
 
2
 
On returns to farming, see Sarthak and Mishra (2011)
 
8
 
 
realizations; abse
nce of access to credit markets or imperfect credit markets leading to sub
-
optimal investment decisions or input applications; poor human resource base; smaller access to 
suitable extension services 
restricting suitable decisions regarding cultivation prac
tices and 
technological know
-

area development, electricity grids; greater negative externalities from poor quality land and 

-
section discusses som
e of the key issues and challenges 
relating to small holding agriculture.
 
 
 
Role of women
:
 
The importance of women in agriculture has been increasing. 
The share of rural 
females in agriculture was around 83 per cent in 2004
-
05 as compared to 67% among rura
l men, 
showing the importance of women in agriculture in rural areas.
 
Percentage of women among 
marginal farmers (38.7%) is higher than that for large farmers (34.5%) in 2004
-
05. These 
proportions have increased over time. 
Agriculture is becoming increasin
gly feminized as men are 
migrating to rural non
-
farm sector. 
They work in 

land preparation, seed selection and seed 
production, sowing, in applying manure, fertilizer and pesticides, weeding, transplanting, 
threshing, winnowing and harvesting etc as well 
as in animal husbandry and dairying, fish 
processing, collection of non timber forest produces (NTFPs), back yard poultry, and collection 
of fuel wood, fodder and other products for family needs

.
 
Despite 
their
 
importance, 
women are continually
 
denied their
 
property rights and access to other productive resources. 
Protecting
 

giving legal s
upport on existing laws, will facilitate
 
recognition for women as farmers and en
able 
them to access credit, inputs, and marketing outlets.
   
 
 
Social Groups
:
 
The proportion of socially disadvantaged groups such as Scheduled Castes (SCs) 
and Scheduled Tribes (STs) is higher among marginal and small farmers than that of medium 
and large
 
farmers. Around 22% of semi
-
marginal and marginal farmers are from SCs compared 
to 7.8% in medium and large farmers. SCs have more than half of their holdings of less than half 
a hectare. Similarly, 15.6% of small farmers belong to STs compared to 14.9% a
mong medium 
and large farmers. The distribution of land ownership among STs is better
 
than SCs. However, 
the quality of STs land is probably of the lowest quality. Social identity of farmers is also seen to 
mediate access to economic resources and outcomes
. Even after accounting for quantity and 
quality of land owned by socially deprived classes, their access to information, marketing, credit 
and publicly provided inputs and extension services are lower. This shows that they possibly 
suffer from discriminat
ion in the delivery of public services as well as market (NCEUS, 2008).
 
 
 
 
Land Issues: Land and tenancy security
:
 
National Commission on Enterprises for Unorganized 
Sector
 
argued that there
 
is a strong evidence that relatively successful implementation of
 
even  a 
modest package of land reforms dramatically improve the prospect of the poor. Regaing small 
and marginal farmers, they own and cultivate some land
 
but it is a limiting factor for getting 
resources. Therefore, tenancy security is important for smal
l holding farmers.
 
 
Land relations are extremely complicated and this complexity has contributed significantly to the 
problems facing actual cultivators. Unregistered cultivators, tenants, and tribal cultivators all face 
difficulties in accessing instituti
onal credit and other facilities available to farmers with land 
titles. One priority is to record and register actual cultivators including tenants and women 
cultivators, and provide passbooks to them, to ensure that they gain access to institutional credi
t 
and other inputs. As part of the reforms, lease market should be freed and some sort of security 
9
 
 
for tenants has to be guaranteed. This will ensure availability of land for cultivation on marginal 
and small farmers. The land rights of tribals in the agen
cy areas must be protected. There is 
considerable scope for further land redistribution, particularly when  waste and cultivable lands 
are taken into account. Complementary inputs for cultivation (initial land development, input 
minikits, credit, etc.) sho
uld be provided to all assignees, and the future assignments of land 
should be in the name of women.
 
 
 

farmers should be assisted to buy land through the provision of in
stitutional credit, on a long 
term basis, at a low rate of interest and by reducing stamp duty. At the same time, they should be 
enabled to enlarge their operational holdings by liberalizing the land lease market. The two 
major elements of such a reform ar
e: security of tenure for tenants during the period of contract; 

Commission, 2007a). Basically, we have to ensure land leasing, create conditions including 
credi
t, whereby the poor can access land from those who wish to leave agriculture. 
 
 
Low level of formal education and skills
: 
Education and skills are important for improving 
farming practices, investment and productivity. Table 
15 gives literacy levels and me
an years of 
education for unorganized self employed agriculture workers by farm size. It shows that literacy 
and mean years of education are lower for small holding farmers compared to medium and large 
farmers. For example, literacy among males and females
 
for marginal farmers respectively were 
62.5% and 31.2% while the corresponding numbers for medium and large farmers were 72.9% 
and 39% (Table 15). Similarly, mean years of education for males among marginal farmers was 
3.9  as compared to 5.3  for medium 
and large farmers. It is important for small holding farmers 
to have a reasonable level of awareness regarding information on agricultur
e. The low level of 

shows t
hat awareness about bio
-
fertilizers, minimum support prices and WTO is associated with 
education levels which are lower for marginal and small farmers.
 
 
 
Credit and Indebtedness
:
 
Small holdings need credit for both consumption and investment 
purposes. Incr
easing indebtedness is one of the reasons for indebtedness among these farmers in 
recent years. Table
 
16 shows that overall indebtedness is not higher for small and marginal 
farmers compared to large farmers. However, the indebtedness for the small & margi
nal farmers 
from formal institutional sources is lower than large farmers and the reverse is true in the case of 
informal sources. The dependence on money lenders is the highest for sub
-
marginal and 
marginal farmers
 
(Table 17)
. 
Table 18 
shows that the shar
e of formal source increases with the 
size of land. At all India level, the share of formal source varies from 22.6% to 58% for small 
and marginal farmers while it varies from 65 to 68% for medium to large farmers. Dependence 
of small and marginal farmers 
on informal sources is high even in states like Andhra Pradesh, 
Punjab and Tamil Nadu. For example, small and marginal farmers of Andhra Pradesh have to 
depend on 73% to 83% of their loans on informal sources. This indicates very low financial 
inclusion fo
r Andhra Pradesh. The NSS data also shows that across social groups, the 
indebtedness through formal sources is lower for STs as compared to others.  
 
 
 
Globalization challenges
: 
Increasing globalization has
 
added to the problems faced by the small 
holding
 
agriculture. The policies of huge subsidies and protection policies by developed 
countries have negative effects on small holding farmers in developing countries. If support is 
10
 
 
not given to small farms, globalization may become advantageous for large farm
s.
There has been 
adverse impact of  trade liberalization on the agricultural economy of the regions growing crops 
such as plantation, cotton and oil seeds in which foreign trade is important. 
With liberalization, 
the issue of efficiency has become highly r
elevant  as domestic production has to compete with 
products of other countries.  In the recent years domestic prices of several agricultural 
commodities have turned higher than international prices. India is not able to check import of a 
large number of c
ommodities even at high tariff. This is true not only in the case of import from 
developed countries where agriculture is highly subsidized but also in the case of products from 
developing countries. India is facing severe import competition in the case of
 
items like palm oil 
from Malaysia and Indonesia, spices from Vietnam, China and Indonesia, tea from Sri Lanka and 
rice from Thailand and Vietnam (Planning Commission, 2007). 
To compete in the global market, 
the country needs to reduce various post
-
 
harves
t costs and undertake suitable reforms to 
improve efficiency of domestic markets and delivery systems. 
To be able to successfully 
compete in a liberalized trade regime, therefore, there is need for a paradigm shift from merely 
maximizing growth to achievin
g efficient growth. 
For farmers, perhaps the single most adverse 
effect has been 
the combination of low prices and output volatility for cash crops
.
 
The effect of 
volatility in international prices on domestic agriculture should be checked by aligning tari
ffs 
with the changing price situation. 
 
 
Impact of 
climate change
: 
Climate change is a major challenge for agriculture, food security and 
rural livelihoods for millions of people including the poor in India.
 
Adverse impact will be more 
on small holding far
mers. 
Climate change is expected to have adverse impact on the living 
conditions of farmers, fishers and forest
-
dependent people who are already vulnerable and food 
insecure. Rural communities, particularly those living in already fragile environments, fac
e an 
immediate and ever
-
growing risk of increased crop failure, loss of livestock, and reduced 
availability of marine, aquaculture and forest products.
 
They would have adverse effects on food 
security and livelihoods of small farmers in particular.
 
In orde
r to have climate change sensitive 
and pro
-
poor policies, there is a need to focus on small farmers. 
Agriculture 
adaptation and 
mitigation could provide benefits for small farmers. The coping strategies would be useful to 
have long term adaptation strategi
es.
 
There is a significant potential for small farmers to 
sequester soil carbon if appropriate policy reforms are implemented. 
The importance of 
collective action in climate change adaptation and mitigation is recognized. Research and 
practice have shown t
hat collective action institutions are very important for technology transfer 
in agriculture and natural resource management among small holders and resource dependent 
communities. 
 
 
 
Water problems
:
 
Water is the leading input in agriculture. Development o
f irrigation and water 
management are crucial for raising levels of living in rural areas.
 
Agriculture has to compete for 
water with urbanization, drinking water and industrialization. As mentioned above, small holding 
agriculture depend more on ground wat
er compared to large farmers who has more access on 
canal water. Ground water is depleting in many areas of India. Marginal and small farmers are 
going to face more problems regarding water in future. Therefore, water management is going to 
be crucial for 
these farmers (more on this below).  
 
 
Diversification
:
 
There has been diversification of Indian diets away from foodgrains to high 
value products like milk and meat products and vegetables and fruits. The increasing middle
-
class due to rapid urbanization,
 
increasing per
-
capita income, increased participation of women 
11
 
 
in urban jobs and impact of globalization has been largely responsible for the diet diversification 
in India. Hi
-
value products have caught the fancy of the expanding middle class and the resu
lt is 
visible in the growing demand for hi
-
value processed products. There is growing demand for 
non
-
foodgrain items in India. The expenditure elasticity for non
-
cereal food items is still quite 
high in India. It is thrice as high when compared to cereals 
in the rural areas and over ten times 
as high in urban areas. Per capita consumption of fruits and vegetables showed the highest 
growth followed by edible oils. Diversification to high value crops and allied activities is one of 
the important sources for r
aising agricultural growth. Since risk is high for diversification, 
necessary support in infrastructure and marketing are needed. Price policy should also encourage 
diversification.
 
Small and marginal farmers can get higher incomes with diversification. Bu
t, 
there are risks in shifting to diversification as the support systems are more for food grains. 
There is a need for support systems for diversification to help the small holder farmers. 
 
 
Risk and vulnerability
:
 
There is enough evidence to suggest that 
poor and poorest of the poor 
households are vulnerable to a range of risks affecting individuals, households or whole 
communities which can have a devastating affect on their livelihoods and well being. 
They have 
higher exposure to a variety of risks at in
dividual or household level. Some of them are (a) health 
shocks: illness, injury, accidents, disability; (b) labour market risk: many work in informal sector 
and have high risk of unemployment and underemployment; (c)harvest risks, life cycle risks, social
 
risk and special risks for vulnerable groups. In addition, they have community risks such as 
droughts, floods, cyclones, structural adjustment policies etc.
 
Small and
 
marginal farmers are 
vulnerable to all these risks. 
Most of the coping mechanisms follow
ed by households are: 
borrowing, sale of assets, spending from savings, assistance from relatives and govt., expanded 
labour supply, child labour, bonded labour, reducing consumption, migration etc.
 
Comprehensive 
social protection programmes are required t
o address the negative effects due 
risks and 
vulnerabilities. 
India has many social protection programmes. The present major schemes for the 
poor in India  
fall into four broad categories: (i) food transfer like public distribution system 
(PDS) and supplem
entary nutrition (ii) self employment (iii) wage employment and (iv) social 
security programmes for unorganized workers.
 
The effectiveness of these programmes have to 
be improved so that small and marginal farmers can also benefit from these programmes. Cr
op 
insurance programmes and future markets have to be strengthened to reduce risks in price and 
yields.
 
 
3.4.
 
Opportunities for Small Holding Agriculture
 
 
Inspite of above challenges, there are many technological and institutional innovations which can 
ena
ble marginal and small farmers to raise agricultural productivity and increase incomes 
through diversification and high value agriculture.
 
 
Before goi
ng to technological innovations, we discuss below the policy issues under research and 
extension in agricu
lture. These are applicable to small and marginal farmers.
 
 
 
3.4.1. 
Research and Extension
 
The yield growth for many crops has declined in the 1990s. Technology plays an important role 
in improving the yields. The National Commission on Farmers also indica
tes that there is a large 

12
 
 
seems to be a technology fatigue in Indian agriculture. The yield gaps given y the Planning 
Commission (2007) are the following. 
 
 
T
he  2003
-
05 data show very large yield gaps:
 
 

 
Wheat: 6% (Punjab) to 84% (M.P.)
 

 
Rice: Over 100% in Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh and UP
 

 
Maize: 7% (Gujarat) to 300% (Assam)
 

 
Jowar:   13% (M.P.) to 200% (Karnataka)
 

 
Mustard: 5% (Haryana) to 150% (Chattisgarh)
 

 
Soybe
an: 7% (Rajasthan) to 185% (Karnataka)
 

 
Sugarcane: 16% (A.P.) to 167% (M.P.)
 
 
A fresh look at the priorities of Indian agricultural research system is necessary in light of 
emerging prospects. There is only marginal increase in the funds for research in the
 
recent 
budgets. Of course states have to take a lead in research and extension. It is known that India 
spends only 0.5 per cent of GDP on agricultural research as compared to more than 1 per cent by 
other developing countries. There is considerable potent
ial for raising the effectiveness of these 
outlays by reordering the priorities in agricultural research and redefining the relative roles of 
public and private sectors in research and extension
3
.
 
 
A review of the research and development activities of the
 
Indian Council of Agricultural 
Resarch (ICAR) system during the first two years of the 10
th
 
Plan revealed several weaknesses. 
Some of these are (a) there is inadequate emphasis on the needs of rainfed areas, which account 
for over 60% of cultivated area; 
(b) crop bias with major focus on rice and wheat; (c) 
proliferation of programmes resulting in resources being spread thinly and lack of focus in areas 
of relevance and opportunity; (d) inadequate priority to emerging challenges, particularly post
-
harvest,
 
marketing and environmental conservation; (e) the multiplicity of institutes with 
overlapping mandates has led to duplication of research work; (f) lack of accountability, less 
emphasis on multidisciplinary research, weak interaction among researchers, ex
tension workers 
and farmers and the private sector and, excessive centralization of planning and monitoring. A 
thorough reform of ICAR system is needed to address these weaknesses. 
 
 
There is a need to shift away from individual crop
-
oriented research focu
sed essentially on 
irrigated areas towards research on crops and cropping systems in the dry lands, hills, tribal and 
other marginal areas
4
. Dry land technology has to be improved. In view of high variability in 
agro
-
climatic conditions in such unfavourabl
e areas, research has to become increasingly 
location
-
specific with greater participation or interaction with farmers. Horticulture crops that are 
land
-
saving and water
-
saving should be encouraged in dry land areas. Research has to be 
improved on horticult
ure crops. 
 
 
Progress in post
-
harvest technology is essential to promote value addition through the growth of 
agro
-
processing industry. Private sector participation in agricultural research, extension and 
marketing is becoming increasingly important especi
ally with the advent of biotechnology and 
                                        
                  
 
3
 
More on research and extension, see Rao (2005)
 
4
 
See Swaminathan (2007) on research and technology
 
13
 
 
protection being given to intellectual property. However, private sector participation tends to be 
limited to profitable crops and enterprises undertaken by resource rich farmers in well endowed 
regions. Moreover, 
private sector is not interested in research for better techniques of soil and 
water management, rainfed agriculture, cropping systems, environmental impact and long term 
sustainability. Therefore, 
the public sector research has to increasingly address the
 
problems 
facing the resource
-
poor farmers in the less endowed regions. The new agricultural technologies 
in the horizon are largely biotechnologies. Effective research is needed to have biotechnologies 
suitable to different locations in India.
 
 
Regarding 
extension, the existing Training and Visit (T and V) system of extension is top
-
down 
in its approach and there is little participation by the farmers. There is a need to take corrective 
steps to deal with the near collapse of the extension system in most s
tates. In the absence of 
public provision of such services, the resource poor and gullible farmers are becoming the 
victims of exploitation by the unscrupulous traders and money lenders interested in selling inputs 
such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides
. There is, therefore, an immediate need for reforming and 
revitalizing the existing agricultural extension system in the country. The main ingredient of 
reforms should be : (a) active involvement of farmers through user groups/associations; (b) 
participat
ion by the private sector and the NGOs; (c) increasing use of media and information 
technology including cyber kiosks to disseminate the knowledge on new agricultural practices 
and the information on output and input prices; and (d) building gender concern
s into the system, 
for example, by manning the extension services predominantly by women
5
.     
 
 
The returns to investment on research and extension will be much higher on agricultural growth 
as compared to other investments. 
 
 
3.4.2.
Technological Innovati
ons
 
 

et al, 2002). Small holder
-
oriented research and extension should give importance to cost 
reduction without reduction in yields. Therefore, new techno
logical innovations are needed. 

principles but without the use of artificial chemical fertilizers, pesticides or agro
-
ecological 
principles but without the use of 
artificial chemical fertilizers, pesticides, or genetically modified 

 
 
The need for adopting the methods of an evergreen revolution has become very urgent now. As 
Swaminathan (2010) mentions, among ot
her things, there are two major pathways to fostering an 
evergreen revolution. The first is organic farming. Productive organic farming needs 
considerable research support, particularly in the areas of soil fertility replenishment and plant 
protection. The
 
other pathway to an evergreen revolution is green agriculture. In this context, 
ecologically sound practices like conservation farming, integrated pest management, integrated 
nutrient supply and natural resources conservation are promoted. Green agricultu
re techniques 
could also include the cultivation of crop varieties bred through use of recombinant DNA 
technology if they are good in resisting to biotic and abiotic stresses or have other attributes like 
improving nutritive quality (Swaminathan, 2010).
 
                                        
                  
 
5
 
Se
e Rao (2005)  
 
14
 
 
Ze
ro Tillage
:
 
Cultivation practices such as zero
-
tillage (which involves injecting seeds directly 
into the soil instead of sowing on ploughed fields) combined with residue management and 
proper fertilizer use can help to preserve soil moisture, maximize wate
r infiltration, increase 
carbon storage, minimize nutrient runoff, and raise yields. 
Iis expanding rapidly in
 
India. In 
2005, in the rice

wheat farming system of the Indo
-
Gangetic plain, farm
ers adopted zero
-
tillage 
on 1.6 million hectares; by 2008, 20

25
 
percent of the wheat in two Indian states (Haryana and 
Punjab) was cultivated using minimum tillage. (WDR, 2010).
 
 
 
Public Sector Led Improved Technologies
: 
Public sector led improved technologies have been 
helping small farmers in India. The improved whe
at varieties in Punjab and technology of single 
cross hybrid for maize have significantly contributed in enhancing yields in small farms. 

development in India is due
 
to 

asy
-
to
-
fit' technologies in the system. The study highlights a 
number of public sector driven improved technologies. These include: (a) productivity enhancing 
technologies; (b) input saving technologies; (c) nutrient balancing technologies; (d) value
 
adding 
technologies. The small interventions reduced crop damage, increased production 
and raised 
income both in domestic and export markets.
 
There are also technologies regarding efficient 
water management (more on this below).
 
 
Rural women play a signif
icant role in animal husbandry and are directly involved in major 
operations like feeding, breeding, management and health care. As the ownership of livestock is 
more evenly distributed with landless laborers, and marginal farmers, the progress in this sec
tor 
will result in a more balanced development of the rural economy, particularly in the reduction of 
poverty and malnutrition.
 
As Singh et al (2002) mention, priorities for live
-
stock technology 
development are animal health, nutrition, and reproduction.
 
 
Nutrient Management: 
Nitrogen applied in fertilizers, manures, biosolids and other N sources are 
not used efficiently by crops. Management strategies to improve the nitrogen use efficiency of 
crops which reduce fertilizer requirements focus on fertilizer 
best management practices. A note 
written for IFPRI by Flynn (2009) says that the best practices should look at application type, 
application rates, application timing and application placement. For example,  balancing 
application rates of nitrogen with ot
her required nutrients including phosphorus, potassium and 
sulphur is a major way of improving nitrogen use efficiency. Similarly, appropriate nitrogen 
application rates are important 
in order to have effectiveness on yields.
 
 
Another way
 
is switching to o
rganic production which can reduce fertilizer use. Better use of 
existing organic sources of nutrients, including animal manure, crop residues, and nitrogen
-
fixing crops such as legumes. Such organic nitrogen sources may also contribute to raising 
sequestr
ation of carbon in soils (Flynn, 2009). However, yields 
have to be maintained
 
with 
organic farming as compared to cultivation with chemical fertilizers. 
 
 
Bio
-
technology
: 
The term biotechnology covers a wide range of scientific techniques and 
products that
 
can be used in numerous ways to boost and sustain the productivity of crops, 
livestock, fisheries and forests. Though agricultural biotechnology is used synonymously with 
genetic modification by general public, there are many techniques in biotechnology a
part from 
genetic modification. 
The other techniques are 

genomics and bioinformatics, marketed
-
assisted 
15
 
 
selection, diagnostic procedures, micro propagation, tissue culture, cloning, artificial 
insemination, embryo transfer and other technologies (Rao and 
Dev, 2010).
 
 
Recently India had two revolutions in technology. One is BT cotton and the other is hybrid 
maize. 
Studies on Bt
 
cotton showed that small farmers benefited from the introduction of this 
technology. A study on four districts of Andhra Pradesh (W
arangal, Nalgonda, Guntur, Kurnool) 
examined, among other things, whether the b
enefits of Bt
 
Cotton technology are shared by all 
groups of farmers across social categories and size groups (Rao and Dev, 2010). The green 
re
volution technologies have been uti
lized by upper strata of farmers and later gradually spread 
to other strata. But in the case of biotechnological application, the small farmers and SC and ST 
farmers also made use of the technology well since the beginning. The small farmers growing Bt 
cot
ton have significantly improved their position compared to the non
-
Bt growing small farmers. 
The net income improved by 69 per cent and farm business 
income improved by 108 per cent. 
This clearly shows that the small farmers are better off with Bt cotton t
han without Bt cotton. 
Same is the case with Scheduled Castes (SCs). Bt cotton led to improving the net income by 59 
per cent. The farm business income is higher by three times than non
-
Bt farmers from SCs. 
Therefore, it is very clear that the farmers from
 
SCs, who are also generally small farmers, got 
benefited from adopting this technology.
 
Information technology
: 
Changes in information technology will help in a big way to improve 
agri
-
business and incomes of small farmers. Indian private companies and NG
Os are global 

leader in ICTs. 
E
-
Choupal 
has expanded access to internet in rural areas. Up to 6,400 internet 
kiosks were set up between 2000 and 2007 by ITC Lim
ited, one of the largest agricultural 
exporters. It reaches about 4 million farmers growing a range of crops 
-
 
soybean, coffee, wheat, 
rice, pulses or shrimp 
-
 
in over 40,000 villages. They get free information in their language about 
local and global mark
et prices, weather forecasts, farming practices and crop insurance. It serves 
as a purchase centre, cutting marketing costs and allowing farmers to obtain a bigger farm price. 
The M. S. Swaminathan Research Foundation established Knowledge Centers in Pondi
cherry in 
1997. With the support of the Indian Space Research Organization, centers in each village are 
connected by satellite to a hub at Villianur. The women self
-

computers to manage their business accounts and coordinate the
ir activities, using video links 
with the other villages. 
 
 
The declining costs of ICTs are giving 
small 
farmers much greater access to information. Mobile 
phone coverage in India is expanding at breakneck speed. Nokia sold several lakhs of new 
mobile phon
e handsets, and new subscriptions are averaging 6 million a month, many in rural 
areas. Computers are now being linked through mobile phone networks to greatly expand the 
scope of information. By linking communication technologies to market exchanges in 
co
mmercial centers, even small farmers can overcome the enormous informational asymmetries 
that limit their bargaining power in traditional supply chains. The revolution in mobile phones is 
helping the small farmers to get information about crop prices and i
nput prices and other related 
information on agriculture.
 
 
3.4.3. 
Institutional Innovations
 
Small holding agriculture faces many challenges. But, a number of innovative institutional 
models are emerging 
and there are many opportunities for small and margin
al farmers in India. 
Institutions relating to (a) land and water management, (b) group or cooperative approach for 
16
 
 
inputs and marketing and, (c) value chains and super markets can enhance productivity, 
sustainability and incomes of small holding agricultur
e.
 
Institutions for sustainable land and water management
 
Development of irrigation and water management are crucial for raising levels of living in rural 
areas
6
.
 
Major areas of concern in irrigation are: decline in real investment, thin spread of 
investme
nt, low recovery of costs, decline in water table, wastages and inefficiencies in water 
use and, non
-
involvement of users
 
Both investment and efficiency in use of water are needed. 
Major areas of reforms needed in irrigation are: stepping up and prioritizi
ng public investment, 
raising profitability of groundwater exploitation and augmenting ground water resources, rational 
pricing of irrigation water and electricity, involvement of user farmers in the management of 
irrigation systems and, making groundwater
 
markets equitable (Rao, 2005). In a recent study, 
Shah et al (2009) indicate that t
he impact of the drought of 2009 is expected be less severe than 
the drought of 2002
 
due to ground water recharge in the last few years. Ground water can be 
exploited in a 
big way in Eastern region. W
atershed development and, water conservation by the 
community are needed under water management.
 
New watershed guidelines based on 

2009. The
 
implementation has to be stepped up in order to obtain benefits in rainfed areas. 
National Rainfed Area Authority has big responsibility in matters relating to water conservation 
and watershed development. Assets created under NREGS can help in improving 
land and water 
management. 
 
 
Environmental concerns are among the policy priorities in India. Particularly degradation of land 
and water is alarming. Watershed development under the new guidelines, in general, has an 
overall positive impact on environment.
 
However, groundwater tables are depleting at an 
alarming rate. The 
de facto
 
privatization of groundwater and subsidized power supply are the 
main culprits. There has been a neglect of minor irrigation sources like tanks. Shortage of 
drinking water has acc
entuated and quality of water has declined over time.
 
 
An integrated approach is needed for water resources management in the country. An appropriate 
strategy should integrate institutional approaches with market principles. Since institutional 
innovation 
(Water user associations) is already in place for canal irrigation, it is time now to 
implement volumetric pricing. There is a need to de
-
link water rights from land rights in order to 
ensure equity and sustainability.
 
 
Institutions like the water user ass
ociations (WUAs) and watershed committees are important for 
water management. The experience of Andhra Pradesh shows that the impact of WUAs has been 
encouraging in these areas. especially in terms of providing irrigation to tail end farmers. This 
has been
 
made possible by cleaning of canals and water courses and monitoring of water losses 
by the WUAs. Area under paddy is reported to have increased significantly following reforms. 
However, much of the reported increase could be statistical because of underr
eporting of 
irrigated area before reform , as this  meant lesser payment  of water tax to revenue department. 
Paddy yields are reported to have increased by 40%. Long term solution for effective functioning 
of WUAs is awareness building and promoting parti
cipatory monitoring and  evaluation. Unlike 
in the case of canal irrigation, WUAs are not found to be  effective in respect of tank irrigation  
due to insufficient allocations. 
 
                                        
                  
 
6
 
On land and water management, see Vaidyanathan (2006)
 
17
 
 
 
In the case of land and forestry, watershed approach and Joint Forest Managem
ent are crucial for 
protecting the environment. The critical issue is sustainability of these programmes. Although 
watersheds have shown positive economic impact, the social issues are missing. More 
participatory approach and involvement of women would lea
d to sustainability of watershed 
development approach. In the case of JFM, the focus is more on high income areas like timber. 
Low value products constituting sources of livelihoods for the poor have low priority. Customary 
rights of the tribals on 
podu 
(s
hifting cult
ivation) have to be recognised.
 
Awareness 
and 
involvement of the civil society is a precondition for checking environmental degradation. 
Environmental  movements would have a discerning impact in this regard.
 
 
Another concern is the land degrad
ation due to excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides. 
Government has programmes such as Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Nutrient 
Management (INM). Keeping in view the ill effects of pesticides and also National Policy on 
Agriculture, In
tegrated Pest Management Approach (IPM) approach has been adopted as a 
cardinal principle and main plank of plant protection in the country in the overall crop 
production programme. Besides ongoing activities, the thrust area will be pertaining to Pest Ris
k 
Analysis (PRA) and post entry quarantine surveillance. This has become essential in the light of 
WTO agreement, which will facilitate more and speedier movement of plants, planting materials 
globally.
 
 

: 


group efforts, where they do not already exist, should be promoted  to overcome constraints of 
small and uneconomic land holdings, for the dissemination of agricultural technology and other 
inputs, as well as for marketing
 
of produce (Agarwal, 2010).
 
T
here has 
also 
been 
greater 

 
For example, Deccan Development Society (DDS), an NGO 
enables women from landless families to access various government schemes to establish claims 
on land, through p
urchase and lease. 

four critical steps that ensured local food 
security in an experiment by the Deccan development society in Andhra 
Pradesh 
where the 


 

s collectives (i
) improved 6,000 
acres of degraded land, (ii
) dalit women 
to
ok cultivable land on 
lease, (iii
) organised their own public distribution of grains with accent 
on coarse cereals consumed by 65 per cent of our rural population; built grain banks at village 
level, and (iv) made systematic collection and preservation of 
seed varieties

 
 

institutional environment to make a fundamental change in the institutional arrangement for 
supporting rural development a
nd agriculture sector. In Gujarat, state government introduced 
Krishi Mohatsav
. A month long intensive campaign is launched during the month of May each 

level from
 
over 15 departments of the government, and over 1500 scientists, are involved in the 

Mohatsava
 
serves as an institutional platform at the village level 
and proved to be an important support for farmers. 
 
 
An initiative in And
hra Pradesh based on the Self Help Group (SHG) provides another example 
of an institutional platform for agriculture. The Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture 
(CMSA) programme was initiated by the Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP) in 
And
hra Pradesh in 2004. The mandate of the program is to eradicate poverty and to improve 
18
 
 
livelihoods of the poor. It may also help in nutrition because of improvements in livelihoods. The 
initiative aims to address the major causes of agriculture distress an
d helps farmers in adopting 
sustainable agricultural practices. CMSA has now reached 8033 villages in 503 mandals of all 22 
districts (Raturi, 2011). It covers about 2.7 million acres and benefit about 1.05 million farmers.
 
 
Institutions
 
for Marketing
 
of S
mall Holdings
 
 
For small and marginal farmers, marketing of their products is main problem apart from credit 
and extension. In recent years , there has been some form of contract arrangements in several 
agricultural crops such as tomatoes, potatoes, chilli
es, gherkin, baby corn, rose, onions, cotton, 
wheat, basmati rice, groundnut, flowers, and medicinal plants. There is a silent revolution in 
institutions regarding non
-
cereal foods. New production 

market linkages in the food supply 
chain are: spot or open
 
market transactions, agricultural co
-
operatives and contract farming 
(Joshi and Gulati, 2003). 
 
 
One of the most 
successful 
producer organization is the Indian dairy cooperative which in 2005  
had 
a net work of more than 100,000 village level dairy cooper
atives with 12.
3 million members 
(see Birthal et al 2008).
 
 
Contract farming has a potential to help the small and marginal farmers overcome constraints in 
accessing inputs, credit, extension and marketing.  In recent years, there has been some form of 
con
tract arrangements in several agricultural crops such as tomatoes, potatoes, chilies, gherkin, 
baby corn, rose, onions, cotton, wheat, basmati rice, groundnut, flowers, and medicinal plants 
and is spreading throughout India in states like Andhra Pradesh (D
ev and Rao, 2005), Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Punjab and Maharashtra. 
 
 
While the pros of contract farming are potentially many, the sponsoring companies may be 
unreliable, may exploit a monopoly position, and/or have inefficient management and marketing 
probl
ems that could result in manipulation of quota and non
-
fulfillment of commitments. 
Contract farming in India is neither backed up by law nor by an efficient legal system. This is the 
single most constraint to widespread use of contract farming in India. Th
e legal system can be 
improved with legislative measures like the model contract and code of practice, registration of 
contracts with marketing committees and tribunals for efficient, speedy and corrupt
-
free dispute 
resolutions.
 
 
 
There is a need to revamp
 
some of the legal hurdles for agro processing and APMC Act
7
. 
Several 
State Governments have already
 
amended their APMC Acts allowing varying degrees
 
of 
flexibility. However several States are yet to notify the relevant
 
rules that would make the 
amendment 
fully operational.
 
These steps should be speedily completed to
 
provide a boost to 
promotion of direct marketing,
 
contract farming, and setting up of markets in private
 
and co
-
operative sectors.
 
 
Most important problem for the 
small 
farmers is output price 
fluctuations. There is a big gap 
between producer prices and consumer prices. 
There are different models for marketing 
collectively by the small and marginal farmers. These are: self help group model, co
-
operative 
model, small producer co
-
operatives and co
ntract farming. 
Apni Mandi
 
in Punjab, 
Rytu Bazars
 
in 
                                        
                  
 
7
 
See Chadha (2009) on agro processing and rural industrialization
 
19
 
 
Andhra Pradesh, dairy co
-
operatives are some of the successful cases in marketing. The real 
challenge lies in organising the small and marginal farmers for marketing and linking them to 
high value agricu
lture.
 
Thus, group approach is needed for getting benefits from marketing.
 
 
Super markets and supply chains
: 
Small farmers can benefit from the emerging super markets 
and value chains. 
The 
presence 
of super markets as retail trade 
is rapidly expanding in t
he 
emerging economies. According to Reardon
 
and Gulati (2008)
, this process has developed in an 
astonishing speed: Supermarkets now enjoy a retail share of 50
-
60% in South America, East 
Asia (China excluded) and South Africa; and a 30
-
50% in Mexico, Centra
l America and much of 
South East Asia. While in China, India and Vietnam their market is still low and variable (2
-
20%), it is experiencing an annual growth between 30% and 50%. 
 
 
Reardon and Minten (2011
a
) examine the patterns and dynamics of diffusion of
 
modern food 
retail in India. They emphasized three surprises in the rise of modern food retail in India. They 
are: 

that the private retail wave has been ex
tremely fast in particular in its second phase, in the pst 6 years, 
when it grew at 49% per year on average, some 5 times faster than the fast growth being experienced in 
the GDP; (3) that the rise of private retail chains has been unique or rare in is dri
vers (in its great majority 


developing countries) in its penetration of the food markets of the poor, of small cities and even rural 
areas, of fresh prod
uct markets, and its use of diverse formats to help toward the above ends

Reardon and Minten, 2011
a
). 
 
 
 
In a study on food supply chains in India, Reardon and Minten (2011) indicate the following 
changes in the past two decades. 
 
 
(1)
 
A modern sector 
is emerging in the whole sale sector with the growth of moden logistics 
firms and specialized modern wholesalers. 
 
(2)
 
Tradition segment of the whole sale sector is also transforming. Based on earlier studies, 
this study presents the findings on transformation
 
of traditional whole sale sector as 
follows.
 
(a)
 
Rural traditional market transformation
 
is much more advanced in certain regions For 
example, West and Central regions of Madhya Pradesh and West and Central Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
are different from Eastrn regions of 
these states. 
 
(b)
 
The marginal farms (0
-
1 hectare) look more like traditional rural India with low 
market surplus, chemical use, credit use, lower use of clod stores etc. On the other 
hand, small and medium farmers are more dynamic.
 
(c)
 
The conventional view is t
hat food supply chains are dominated by long chain of 
many hands. The recent findings show that supply chains can be short.
 
(d)
 
Conventional view is that farmers are at the mercy of money lender of because of tied 
credit. But, the surveys show that less than 5
 
per cent take advance or credit in any 
form from brokers or wholesalers. 
 
(e)
 
The surveys show rapid development of cold stores for potato in Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar in 2000s. 
 
 
In India, the expansion of modern retailing has the potential to spark investment
 
in marketing 
efficiency and processing that yields benefits to both producers and consumers. 
In those cases 
20
 
 
where small producers have been able to integrate into the supplying chains, supermarkets have 
offered enhanced security and considerably higher ma
rgins than the traditional clients, such as 
wholesales and groceries. However, there is scope for exploitation in contract farming and super 
markets if rules are not framed properly.
 
 
3.5. Policies to Support to Small Holders
 
In the case of small holding a
griculture, Government has to play an important
 
role in 
improving 
productivity and incomes of small farmers. 
The 11
th
 
Five Year Plan says that 

the agricultural 
strategy must focus on 
85
% of farmers who are small and marginal, increasingly female, and 
who 
find it difficult to access inputs, credit and extension or to market their output. While some 
of these farmers may ultimately exit from farming, the overwhelming majority will continue to 
remain in the sector and the objective of inclusiveness requires th
at their needs are attended to

(p.8
, Vol.3)
. 
 
 
The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector (NCEUS) has 
recommended a special programme for marginal and small farmers. The report of NCEUS 
analyses the status and constraints faced by m
arginal and small farmers and focuses on the need 
for a special programme which aimed at capacity building of these farmers, both the farm and 
non
-
farm activities.
 
As the marginal and small farmers suffer from market failures in agriculture 
in terms of cre
dit, input supplies and marketing of output, accessto new technologies etc. NCUS 
recommended the four measures. These are: (a) Special programmes for maginal and small 
farmers; (b) Emphasis on accelerated land and water management; (c) credit for marginal 
and 

 
 
The Commission st
rongly advocates that a strategy for marginal and small farmers must focus on 
group approaches in order to benefit from the economies of scale. A focused approach can be 
used to ince

other can facilitate in finding solutions to problems of irrigation, inputs, procurement, markets 
and risk. The Commission has considered four important models for group app
roach in the 
country. These are: Co
-


 
 

em to hold greater 
promise for expansion. It may be noted that formation of marginal and small farmers


Pradham (IKP) or CMSA mentioned above in Andhra Prade

SEWA in Gujarat. Such initiatives are being developed in Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Orissa and 

is the capacity building and group f
ormation among the poor marginal and small farmers can not 
be simply seen as an extension of routine departmental activity and as one of the many activities 

promoted where 

 
not operating.
 
 
The elements of special programmes advocated by NCEUS (2008) are the following
 
(a)
 

help groups (SHGs) are few. Special efforts hav
e to be made to facilitate formation of 

21
 
 
Development Society (MSFDS) for the promotion, capacity building and coordination of 

ups.
 
(b)
 

groups to banks is an essential step towards needed credit flow to these farmers.
 
(c)
 
Training and capacity building: The special programme aims at motivating and enablin
g 
marginal and small farmers to acquire skills 
by establishing Community Resource 
Centres, by promoting marginal and small farmer activists at the village, cluster and 
block levels.
 
(d)
 
Support for strengthening and creation of non
-
farm activities: This aims t
o bridge the 
farm activities and non
-
farm activities of small holding agriculture as income from small 
farming is hardly sufficient to meet the basic needs of the farm households.
 
(e)
 
Gender
-
focused activities: It is known that the share of women is increasing
 
in 

representation of women farmers.
 
(f)
 
Planning for development of Marginal and Small Farmers: The Marginal and Small 

lopment strategy for 
these farmers.
 
 
Rural non
-
farm 
sector
 
As mentioned above, the income from small and marginal farms is not enough to take care of 
daily consumption and they have to borrow to survive. Therefore, small holdings farmers have to 
get part o
f income from rural non
-
farm
 
activities. Therefore, promotion of rural non
-
farm sector 
is essential for generating incomes for rural population. 
Poverty can not be removed with 55% of 
workers in agricultural sector.
 
Ultimately, many of the small and margin
al farmers have to be 
shifted to rural non
-
farm sector and urban areas. 
 
 
 
India currently produces about 50 million tonnes of fruits and 90 million tonnes of vegetables. 
Only 2% of these fruits and vegetables are processed as against 23% in China, 78% in 
Phillippines, 83% in Malaysia. 
Half of those engaged in agriculture are still illiterate and 
just 5% 
have 
completed higher secondary education. Even in 2004
-
05, around 
60% of rural male workers 
and 85% of rural female workers are either illiterate
 
or have 
been educated upto primary level. In 
other words, 
education and skills are constraints.
 
India can learn from China on rural 
transformation.
 
China experienced a structural transformation in the last three decades. The 

ing up  the  physical and social infrastructure (including 
land reforms). India should learn from China on reforms in agricultural growth, rural non
-
farm 
employment, public investment and human development. The impact of growth on poverty 
reduction is quit
e significant (Rao, 2007). China started with agricultural reforms. Agricultural 
growth was quite high. The economic and institutional reforms in the whole economy created 
space for rural non
-
farm sector (TVEs and others). Diversification towards rural non
-
form sector 
in China is  one of  the important factors responsible  for rural poverty  reduction (poverty is only 
3%). This was partly due to agricultural productivity.  
 
 
Rural Infrastructure Development
 
Regarding protection of agriculture in OECD countr
ies, some suggest that developing countries 
also should protect their agriculture. However, a better option is to provide more rural and 
agricultural goods that are undersupplied by the market (Lipton, 2006). It also includes rural 
22
 
 
infrastructure developme
nt like roads, irrigation, communications etc. Returns are also high from 
investments in agricultural R&D, rural roads and other infrastructure and knowledge generation 
(Hazell, 2011). The rural infrastructure will enable small and marginal farmers to comp
ete with 
other famers in India as well as in other countries. 
 
 
4. 
LESSONS FROM INDIAN EXPERIENCE
 
Indian experience on small hold
ing agriculture provides some
 
lessons for developing countries. 
 
 
(a) 
Green revolution
 
and Small Farms

n which started in the mid
-
1960s 
heralded a new era in Indian agriculture. The cultivation of high yielding varieties of seeds at 
recommended dosages of fertilizers were encouraged in water assured areas.
 
Initially, t
he 
medium and large farmers in irrigate
d areas benefited 
from the new technology. However, small 
holding agriculture also benefited from green revolution because of government support in 
accessing 
services.  
 
 
 
(b) 
Food 
grains 
management
:
 
The food grains management policy of India consists of t
hree 
instruments: (a) minimum support prices and procurement; (b) buffer stock and (c) public 
distribution system. During 2006
-
08, there were significant increase in global food prices of rice 
and wheat. In the case of India, food grain prices increased on
ly around 10 per cent as compared 
to global food price increase of 80 to 90 per cent. 
Food grain management is partly responsible 
for insulation from the rise of global food grain prices. Small and marginal farmers also 
benefited 
 
from these policies.
 
 
 
(c
) 
Dairy cooperatives
:
 
 
Other countries can learn from the dairy cooperatives in India. 

s 
dairy sector is dominated by smallholders, and contractin
g with a large number of them involves 
transaction costs 
for the processors. The processors do not
 
have much choice but to take milk 
from smallholder
 
producers. The problem of the higher cost of contracting with small producers 
is overcome by contracting
 
with a single person in the village

often an agent

who acts as an 
intermediary between the processor
 
and producers
 
(Birthal et al, 2008)
.
 
 
 
National Dairy Development Board covers 1,40, 227 village level societies and 14 million farm 
families
 
of which 4 million are women. It has a daily pro
curement of 22 million liters of milk
8
. 
Amul
 
Pattern of dairy cooperatives have contributed immensely to the fact that India has 
progressed from a milk
-
deficit country to emerge as the largest milk
-
producing nation in the 
world. In the process, they have g
enerated millions of days of employment for the rural poor and 
improved their socio
-
economic condition
9
.
 
 
(d) 
Water management in Gujarat
:
 
The government of Gujarat
 
played an important role in the 
Gujarat miracle for agriculture in 2000s. 
Gujarat has recor
ded
 
high and steady growth at 9.6% 
per year in agricultural state domestic product since 1999
-
2000. 
What are the factors responsible 

he Gujarat government has aggressively 
pursued an innovative agricu
lture development programme by liberalising markets, inviting 
private capital, reinventing agricultural extension, improving roads and other infrastructure

. 
If it 
is only canal irrigation, high growth should have been mainly in 
South and Central Gujarat
.
 
                                        
                  
 
8
 
See www.nddb.org
 
9
  
Speech of Chairman, 
Amul
 
Dairy, 2007
 
23
 
 
However, the evidence shows that 
dry Saurashtra and Kachchh, and North Gujarat that have 
been at the forefront. 

These could not have performed so well but for the improved availability 
of groundwater for irrigation. Arguably, mass
-
based water harvesting a
nd farm power reforms 


.
 
This is possible due to more than 
100,000 check dams and major programme on Khet Talavadi (water ponds in the fields).
 
10
 
 
(e) 
Self Help groups and group approach
:
 
The wom

(SHG) 
movement 
particularly SHG
-
bank linkage programme 
has spread all over the country. As mentioned above, 
there are two successful models in the country. 
One is Andhra Pradesh model and the other is 

terventions and processes have resulted in a sustained 
process of empowerment of its women members. 
The real power of the 
SHG
-
bank linkage 
model (
SBL model
)
 
lies in the economies of scale created by Self Help
 
Group (SHG) 

 
purchase of 
inputs (seeds, fertilisers etc.) and marketing of outputs (crops, vegetables, milk,
 
NTFPs etc).
 
Government of India has now started National Rural Liv
elihoods Mission (NRLM) in 2011. 
There is a clear understanding that the
 
SBL programme can only be successful if it is tied up 
with livelihood programmes such as
 
improved agriculture, dairying, marketing etc.
 
 
 
(f) 
Institutional innovations
:
 
As discussed a
bove, there are many institutional innovations in 
input services, land water management and output marketing for marginal and small farmers. 
Other countries can learn from these experiences.
 
 
(g) 
Rights based approach
:
 
India has been rights approach for se
veral development programmes 
and to maintain transparency. The country has 
Right to Information, 100 days of guaranteed 
unskilled employment under National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
,
 
Right to Education. It 
is also going for Right to Food by introducin
g National Food Security Act.
 
These rights approach 
puts pressures on governments to deliver the services to citizens.  Basically we have to go 
beyond supply side and focus on demand side. Social pressures are needed for public action. 
Better monitoring sy
stems have to be developed at Central, state, district and village levels to 
realize rights. Justiciability is one aspect of rights. However, one (particularly the poor) can not 
go to court every time right is violated. It is the responsibility of citizens
 
and NGOs to organize  
campaigns for better functioning of the programmes. Public accountability is crucial for the 
success of right
s approach
. 
 
 
(h
) 
Learning from others
: India also can learn from countries like China and Brazil on 
agriculture and other p
olicies on reducing poverty. India can learn from China on 
agricultural 
transformation, 
education, infrastructure, macro policies, doing business, equitable asset 
distri
bution and
, rural non
-
farm
 
sector development. Similarly, Latin American Countries like
 
Brazil can offer lessons to India on agriculture research (e.g.Agriculture research corporation 
EMBRAPA) and Zero hunger programme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        
                  
 
10
 
See Gulati (2009)
 
24
 
 
References
 
 

through c

00814. Washington, D.C. 
 
 

contribution to growth and small farmer part

 
 


Nos. 26 and 27.
 
 
Dev, Mahen
dra, S. Inclusive growth in India: Agriculture, poverty and human development. Oxford 
University Press; 2008.
 


-
27
, Mumbai
 
 

 
2
nd
 
Prof. Dayanath Jha Memorial Lecture, National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy 
Research, New Delhi 
 
 


the Conference on new directions for small holder agriculture, 24
-
25 January 2011, Rome, IFAD.
 
 
Joshi P K and A. Gulati (2003), 

 
Paper 
presented at the Dragon and Elephant: A Comparative Study of Economic and Agricultural Reforms in 

, New Delhi, India, March 25
-
26
 
 

Jo
urnal of Agricultural and Development Economics, 
Vol 3, No.1, 2006, pp58
-
85
 
 
Madhur, Gautam (2011), "India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth
-
 
Policy and Investment 
Options", mimeo, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
 
 
 


National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector, NCEUS, New Delhi
 
 

Press, New Delh
i
 
 
Rao, NC and Dev, S.Mahendra (2010), 
Biotechnology in Indian Agriculture: Potential, Performance and 
Concerns
, 
Academic Foundation, New Delhi
 
 
Reardon , T and B. Minten (2011)
 

Discussion Paper
 
01115, August 2011.  
 
 
25
 
 


 
 

 
farmers in India: Food Security and 

 
 
Shah
,
 
Tushaar, Ashok Gulati , Hemant P , ganga Shreedhar , R C Jain
 


litical Weekly, Vol. 44, No.52
 
 
Sundaram, K. (2001), "Employment and Poverty in 1990s, Further Results from NSS 55th Round, 
Employment
-
unemployment survey, 1999
-
00", Economic and Political Weekly, 11 August, pp.3039
-
49
 
 
Sundaram, K. (2007), "Employment and
 
Poverty in India, 2000
-
2005",
 
Economic and Political Weekly, 
July 28, pp.3121
-
3131
 
 


older agriculture, 24
-
25 
January 2011, Rome, IFAD
 
 
Vaidynathan, A. (

Oxford Collected Essays.
 
 
 
26
 
 
Tables 
 
 
Table 1 
Share of Agriculture in GDP and Employment: All India 
 
Year
 
Share in GDP (%)
 
Share in Employment (%)
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and 
fishing
 
Agriculture*
 
 
1950
-
1
 
57.7
 
50.2
 
--
 
1960
-
1
 
53.0
 
47.3
 
75.9
 
1980
-
1
 
39.7
 
35.8
 
--
 
2004
-
5
 
18.9
 
15.9
 
56.4
 
2008
-
9
 
15.7
 
13.3
 
--
 
Source

50

51 to 2002


Foundation, December 2004, Mumbai; Brochure on the New Series of National Accounts, Base Year 2005; K. 
Sundaram, (2001, 2007)
 
 
Table 2 
Growth Rates in Agriculture GDP: All India
 
Period
 
Growth Rate (
per cent per annum)
 
1950
-
1 to 1964
-
5
 
2.51
 
1867
-
8 to 1980
-
1
 
2.20
 
1980
-
1 to 1990
-
1
 
3.07
 
1992
-
3 to 1996
-
7
 
3.85
 
1992
-
3 to 2001
-
2
 
2.76
 
1997
-
8 to 2004
-
5
 
1.60
 
2004
-
5 to 2010
-
1
 
3.47
 
Source
: 
National Accounts Statistics
. Various years. Central Statistical O
rganisation, Government of
 
India.
 
Note
: GDP is in 1980

1 constant prices from 1950

1 to 1980

1; in 1993

4 constant prices for the period 
1980

1 to 2004

5; in 2004
-
5 constant prices for the period 2004
-
5 to 2010
-
1. Quick estimates for 2009
-
10 and 
advanced e
stimates for 2010
-
1.
 
 
T
able 3
. Changes in Percentage Distribution of Operate Holdings and Operated Area
 
 
Percentage Distribution of farm holdings
 
Percentage Distribution of Operated Area 
 
Land Class
 
1960
-
61
 
1981
-
82
 
1991
-
92
 
2002
-
03
 
1960
-
61
 
1981
-
82
 
1991
-
92
 
2002
-
03
 
Marginal
 
39.1
 
45.8
 
56.0
 
62.8
 
6.9
 
11.5
 
15.6
 
22.6
 
Small
 
22.6
 
22.4
 
19.3
 
17.8
 
12.3
 
16.6
 
18.7
 
20.9
 
Small&Marginal
 
61.7
 
68.2
 
75.3
 
80.6
 
19.2
 
28.1
 
34.3
 
43.5
 
Semi
-
medium
 
19.8
 
17.7
 
14.2
 
12.0
 
20.7
 
23.6
 
24.1
 
22.5
 
Medium
 
14.0
 
11.1
 
8.6
 
6.1
 
31.2
 
30.1
 
26.4
 
22
.2
 
Large
 
4.5
 
3.1
 
1.9
 
1.3
 
29.0
 
18.2
 
15.2
 
11.8
 
Total
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
Note: Marginal 0.01 to 1.00 ha.; Small 1.01 to 2.00 ha; Semi
-
Medium 2.00 to 4.00 ha; Medium 4.01 to 10.00 ha; 
Large above 10 ha.
 
Source: 
NCEUS (2008) 
Nati
onal Sample Survey Land Holdings 8
th
, 17
th
, 26
th
, 37
th
, 48
th
, 55
th
 
Rounds, Central 
Statistical Organization, Government of India
 
 
Table 4
. Average Size of Land Holdings
 
 
State/UT
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Semi
-
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium
 
 
 
 
 
Holdings
 
  
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
 
7
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
0.44
 
1.42
 
2.67
 
5.70
 
16.34
 
1.25
 
Arunachal Pradesh
 
0.50
 
1.32
 
2.66
 
5.77
 
16.13
 
3.69
 
Assam
 
0.39
 
1.30
 
2.73
 
5.22
 
53.02
 
1.15
 
Bihar
 
0.30
 
1.21
 
2.62
 
5.24
 
15.50
 
0.58
 
Chhattisgarh
 
0.44
 
1.42
 
2.70
 
5.76
 
16.49
 
1.60
 
27
 
 
Goa
 
0.32
 
1.26
 
2.56
 
5.64
 
23.77
 
0
.84
 
Gujarat
 
0.53
 
1.46
 
2.78
 
5.80
 
16.91
 
2.33
 
Haryana
 
0.45
 
1.43
 
2.81
 
5.99
 
16.48
 
2.32
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
0.41
 
1.40
 
2.71
 
5.69
 
15.91
 
1.07
 
Jammu & Kashmir
 
0.37
 
1.40
 
2.66
 
5.39
 
21.13
 
0.67
 
Karnataka
 
0.46
 
1.44
 
2.72
 
5.83
 
14.83
 
1.74
 
Kerala
 
0.14
 
1.32
 
2.52
 
5.29
 
40.93
 
0.24
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
0.49
 
1.45
 
2.77
 
5.94
 
15.50
 
2.22
 
Maharashtra
 
0.50
 
1.42
 
2.69
 
5.64
 
15.38
 
1.66
 
Manipur
 
0.53
 
1.29
 
2.47
 
4.86
 
11.38
 
1.15
 
Meghalaya
 
0.55
 
1.45
 
2.58
 
5.41
 
13.12
 
1.30
 
Mizoram
 
0.64
 
1.28
 
2.33
 
4.78
 
13.14
 
1.24
 
Nagaland
 
0.52
 
1.19
 
2.55
 
6.20
 
15.83
 
7
.28
 
Orissa
 
0.50
 
1.39
 
2.69
 
5.63
 
16.48
 
1.25
 
Punjab
 
0.63
 
1.40
 
2.67
 
5.75
 
15.14
 
4.03
 
Rajasthan
 
0.48
 
1.44
 
2.85
 
6.19
 
18.21
 
3.65
 
Sikkim
 
0.42
 
1.40
 
2.74
 
5.79
 
20.67
 
1.57
 
Tamil Nadu
 
0.37
 
1.40
 
2.72
 
5.68
 
19.48
 
0.89
 
Tripura
 
0.31
 
1.37
 
2.55
 
5.16
 
78.77
 
0.56
 
Uttrakhan
d 
 
0.39
 
1.39
 
2.71
 
5.47
 
25.07
 
0.95
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
0.40
 
1.41
 
2.74
 
5.57
 
15.07
 
0.83
 
West Bengal
 
0.51
 
1.59
 
2.77
 
5.12
 
27
.
8
9
 
0.82
 
A & N Islands 
 
0.39
 
1.38
 
2.53
 
4.31
 
46.79
 
2.00
 
Chandigarh 
 
0.39
 
1.42
 
2.79
 
5.92
 
12.00
 
1.44
 
Dadar & Nagar Haveli 
 
0.52
 
1.32
 
2.75
 
5.7
8
 
15.95
 
1.48
 
Daman & Diu 
 
0.29
 
1.37
 
2.63
 
5.86
 
20.25
 
0.59
 
Delhi
 
0.42
 
1.38
 
2.86
 
5.77
 
15.27
 
1.52
 
Lakshadweep 
 
0.19
 
1.27
 
2.56
 
5.47
 
22.33
 
0.27
 
Pondicherry
 
0.29
 
1.42
 
2.74
 
5.68
 
19.50
 
0.70
 
All
-
India*
 
0.24
 
1.42
 
2.39
 
4.42
 
13.16
 
1.33
 
 
Note: Includes institution
al holdings also. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* No data available for Jharkhand
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source : Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Agricultural Census Division.
 
 
Table 5
: Extent of Area Under Irrigation in different farm size categories
 
Year
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Semi
-
medium
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All 
Categories
 
1980
-
81
 
40
 
33
 
29
 
24
 
16
 
27
 
1990
-
91
 
44
 
36
 
33
 
30
 
22
 
33
 
2000
-
01
 
51
 
39
 
37
 
36
 
31
 
39
 
Source:
 
Chand et a
l (2011); From Agriculture
 
Census
 
 
Table 6
: Fertilizer Consumption per ha of net sown area according to farm size class
 
Year
 
Mar
ginal
 
Small
 
Semi
-
medium
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All 
Categories
 
 
Total Area
 
1981
-
82
 
55
 
48
 
42
 
36
 
27
 
40
 
1991
-
92
 
99
 
85
 
77
 
68
 
54
 
76
 
2001
-
02
 
175
 
129
 
112
 
95
 
68
 
119
 
 
Irrigated Area
 
1981
-
82
 
100
 
98
 
99
 
97
 
101
 
99
 
28
 
 
1991
-
92
 
145
 
140
 
147
 
144
 
157
 
146
 
2001
-
02
 
252
 
206
 
190
 
174
 
17
1
 
203
 
 
Unirrigated Area
 
1981
-
82
 
24
 
22
 
18
 
14
 
9
 
16
 
1991
-
92
 
58
 
48
 
39
 
32
 
19
 
38
 
2001
-
02
 
96
 
76
 
63
 
46
 
22
 
61
 
 
Source: Chand et al (2011): from Input Survey, Ministry of Agriculture
 
 
Table 
7
: 
Share of Area under HYV 
according to farm size class
 
Year
 
Marginal
 
S
mall
 
Semi
-
medium
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All 
Categories
 
 
Total Area
 
1996
-
97
 
59
 
55
 
54
 
53
 
42
 
54
 
2001
-
02
 
72
 
68
 
65
 
61
 
47
 
64
 
 
Irrigated Area
 
1996
-
97
 
80
 
76
 
76
 
76
 
75
 
77
 
2001
-
02
 
89
 
86
 
85
 
82
 
78
 
85
 
 
Unirrigated Area
 
1996
-
97
 
37
 
37
 
38
 
36
 
25
 
35
 
2001
-
02
 
52
 
54
 
52
 
46
 
30
 
48
 
 
Source: Chand et al (2011): from Input Survey, Ministry of Agriculture
 
 
Table 8
: Cropping Intensity according to farm size class
 
Year
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Semi
-
medium
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All 
Categories
 
1981
-
82
 
134
 
128
 
125
 
120
 
116
 
124
 
1991
-
92
 
137
 
130
 
124
 
121
 
118
 
126
 
2001
-
02
 
139
 
128
 
126
 
125
 
121
 
128
 
 
Table 
9
:
 
Cropping Patterns by Farm Size: 2003
 
Crop
 
Small
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All
 
Paddy
 
35.0
 
24.7
 
13.4
 
25.8
 
Wheat
 
19.0
 
15.6
 
12.8
 
16.3
 
Corase Cereals
 
16.5
 
19.4
 
18.3
 
17.7
 
Pulses
 
8.0
 
11.0
 
14.6
 
10.8
 
Oilseeds
 
7.2
 
12.0
 
14.0
 
10.4
 
Fruits
 
1.2
 
1.4
 
0.9
 
1.2
 
Vegetables
 
3.5
 
2.0
 
1.0
 
2.4
 
Condiments and 
spices
 
1.0
 
1.2
 
1.0
 
1.1
 
Sugarcane
 
2.6
 
3.5
 
2.5
 
2.8
 
Cotton
 
2.1
 
4.8
 
15.4
 
6.9
 
Other crops
 
3.9
 
4.4
 
6.0
 
4.7
 
Total
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
100.0
 
Source: Birthal et al (2011)
 
 
 
29
 
 
Table 10. Share of S
mall and Marginal farmers in land possessed and in crop output (%)
 
States
 
Share in 
Area (
Land Possessed
)
 
Share in Output
 
West Bengal
 
83.0
 
86.2
 
Uttaranchal
 
81.4
 
46.7
 
Kerala
 
79.8
 
78.1
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
73.7
 
73.9
 
Orissa
 
73.2
 
72.5
 
Jharkhand
 
73.1
 
78.1
 
Ass
am
 
72.4
 
70.7
 
Bihar
 
67.2
 
69.2
 
Jammu and Kshmir
 
66.4
 
77.3
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
59.4
 
65.1
 
Tamil Nadu
 
54.4
 
51.7
 
Chattisgarh
 
49.4
 
46.1
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
47.5
 
46.7
 
Haryana
 
42.2
 
29.9
 
Karnataka
 
37.4
 
38.5
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
34.3
 
27.9
 
Gujarat
 
34.3
 
35.3
 
Maharashtra
 
31.7
 
35.2
 
Punjab
 
29.9
 
19.3
 
Rajasthan
 
22.6
 
33.2
 
All India
 
46.1
 
51.2
 
 
 
Table 
11
: Value of Output per Hectare (Rs.)
 
State
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Marginal & Small
 
Medium & 
Large
 
All
 
Punjab
 
29448
 
26120
 
27213
 
28983
 
28623
 
Kerala
 
26485
 
27576
 
26814
 
28655
 
27197
 
Jammu & K
ashmir
 
26774
 
24768
 
26057
 
16914
 
23214
 
West Bengal
 
21065
 
20429
 
20874
 
19004
 
20594
 
Assam
 
18484
 
17370
 
17975
 
18296
 
18068
 
Haryana
 
17769
 
16872
 
17304
 
17541
 
17470
 
Uttaranchal
 
15405
 
12694
 
14859
 
69131
 
25536
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
14777
 
14849
 
14813
 
12886
 
13720
 
Uttar Prad
esh
 
14442
 
14441
 
14442
 
15611
 
14826
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
12680
 
17650
 
14347
 
19198
 
15362
 
Tamil Nadu
 
15629
 
11353
 
13926
 
15799
 
14771
 
Bihar
 
14230
 
13184
 
13833
 
13847
 
13837
 
Jharkhand
 
14275
 
12457
 
13568
 
11420
 
13034
 
Maharashtra
 
13212
 
11350
 
12064
 
7140
 
8339
 
Karnataka
 
11
727
 
12178
 
11962
 
10194
 
10809
 
Gujarat
 
12001
 
11656
 
11807
 
11504
 
11609
 
Chhattisgarh
 
8612
 
8128
 
8339
 
7953
 
8126
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
8543
 
7546
 
7927
 
8783
 
8526
 
Orissa
 
7207
 
6374
 
6870
 
6731
 
6831
 
Rajasthan
 
7177
 
5629
 
6330
 
4213
 
4739
 
All India
 
14754
 
13001
 
13944
 
11333
 
12535
 
Note: All India includes small states Goa, Delhi, Pondicherry,  North Eastern States & UTs.
 
Source: Computed using NSS unit level data 59
th
 
Round on Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers 2003.
 
 
30
 
 
Table 12. Cost of Cultivation per hectare (Rs.)
 
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Marginal &small
 
Medium & large
 
All
 
Cost per ha (Rs.)
 
6975
 
6046
 
6530
 
5252
 
5841
 
Source: Assessment Survey of Farmers, 2003
 
 
Table 13
: Net Farm Income per Hectare of Cropped Area from Cultivation 
 
State
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Marginal & Small
 
Medium & 
Large
 
A
ll
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
4224
 
5043
 
4637
 
5359
 
5047
 
Assam
 
15765
 
14682
 
15269
 
15238
 
15260
 
Bihar
 
7997
 
7566
 
7834
 
8479
 
8032
 
Chhattisgarh
 
5317
 
5157
 
5227
 
4468
 
4809
 
Gujarat
 
5717
 
5875
 
5806
 
5536
 
5630
 
Haryana
 
9922
 
9151
 
9523
 
8155
 
8567
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
7887
 
11674
 
9157
 
11
785
 
9707
 
Jammu & Kashmir
 
20330
 
20295
 
20317
 
13079
 
18067
 
Jharkhand
 
10655
 
9406
 
10169
 
8898
 
9854
 
Karnataka
 
5695
 
6333
 
6028
 
5672
 
5796
 
Kerala
 
16829
 
18109
 
17216
 
15799
 
16921
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
5294
 
4060
 
4531
 
5203
 
5001
 
Maharashtra
 
6547
 
5712
 
6032
 
3653
 
4232
 
Orissa
 
3
448
 
3096
 
3306
 
2939
 
3204
 
Punjab
 
18582
 
15780
 
16701
 
16615
 
16632
 
Rajasthan
 
2651
 
1392
 
1962
 
1345
 
1499
 
Tamil Nadu
 
6088
 
3658
 
5120
 
7723
 
6295
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
6700
 
7399
 
6998
 
8281
 
7421
 
Uttaranchal
 
11286
 
8527
 
10730
 
64752
 
21358
 
West Bengal
 
9528
 
9444
 
9503
 
9512
 
9503
 
All India
 
7809
 
6955
 
7414
 
6080
 
6694
 
Note: All India includes small states Goa, Delhi, Pondicherry,  North Eastern States & UTs.
 
Source: Computed using NSS unit level data 59
th
 
Round on Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers 2003.
 
 
 
Table 14
: Income and Con
sumption per Farmer Household (Rs. Per month), by Size Category of Farmers 
 
State
 
Marginal
 
Small
 
Semi
-
medium
 
 
Incom
e
 
Consump
-
tion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Incom
e
 
Consump
-
tion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Income
 
Consump
-
tion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
1235
 
2159
 
-
924
 
1837
 
2549
 
-
712
 
259
0
 
3045
 
-
455
 
Bihar
 
1439
 
2254
 
-
815
 
2667
 
3246
 
-
579
 
4460
 
3599
 
861
 
Chhattisgarh
 
1187
 
1754
 
-
567
 
1684
 
2204
 
-
520
 
2858
 
2681
 
177
 
Gujarat
 
1931
 
2725
 
-
794
 
2815
 
3386
 
-
571
 
3757
 
3698
 
59
 
Haryana
 
2155
 
3820
 
-
1665
 
2919
 
5233
 
-
2314
 
4289
 
5122
 
-
833
 
Jharkhand
 
1814
 
1835
 
-
21
 
27
13
 
2149
 
564
 
4901
 
2674
 
2227
 
Karnataka
 
1951
 
2262
 
-
311
 
2474
 
2693
 
-
219
 
3796
 
3262
 
534
 
Kerala
 
3602
 
4075
 
-
473
 
6290
 
5262
 
1028
 
10639
 
7178
 
3461
 
Madhya 
Pradesh
 
1099
 
1973
 
-
874
 
1193
 
2241
 
-
1048
 
1439
 
2720
 
-
1281
 
Maharashtra
 
1761
 
2467
 
-
706
 
2183
 
2583
 
-
400
 
3525
 
3026
 
499
 
Orissa
 
901
 
1578
 
-
677
 
1425
 
2034
 
-
609
 
2456
 
2688
 
-
232
 
Punjab
 
2840
 
3900
 
-
1060
 
4462
 
5452
 
-
990
 
6605
 
5860
 
745
 
Rajasthan
 
1427
 
2809
 
-
1382
 
1650
 
3668
 
-
2018
 
1678
 
3875
 
-
2197
 
Tamil Nadu
 
1739
 
2285
 
-
546
 
2244
 
3187
 
-
943
 
3658
 
3691
 
-
33
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
1198
 
2526
 
-
1328
 
2428
 
3728
 
-
1300
 
3978
 
4948
 
-
970
 
West Bengal
 
1862
 
2517
 
-
655
 
3643
 
3877
 
-
234
 
5993
 
4754
 
1239
 
31
 
 
All India
 
1659
 
2482
 
-
823
 
2493
 
3148
 
-
655
 
3589
 
3685
 
-
96
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State
 
Medium
 
Large
 
All
 
 
Incom
e
 
Consump
-
tion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Incom
e
 
Consump
-
tion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Income
 
Consump
-
t
ion
 
Differ
-
ence
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
5479
 
4133
 
1346
 
9418
 
5724
 
3694
 
1634
 
2386
 
-
752
 
Bihar
 
9526
 
5678
 
3848
 
27766
 
8174
 
19592
 
1810
 
2459
 
-
649
 
Chhattisgarh
 
3860
 
3716
 
144
 
10500
 
5161
 
5339
 
1618
 
2045
 
-
427
 
Gujarat
 
6355
 
4687
 
1668
 
5084
 
4391
 
693
 
2684
 
3127
 
-
443
 
Haryana
 
5353
 
6463
 
-
1110
 
16110
 
8234
 
7876
 
2882
 
4414
 
-
1532
 
Jharkhand
 
7990
 
2773
 
5217
 
23433
 
3251
 
20182
 
2069
 
1897
 
172
 
Karnataka
 
5178
 
3563
 
1615
 
16837
 
8844
 
7993
 
2616
 
2608
 
8
 
Kerala
 
15045
 
8820
 
6225
 
***
 
***
 
***
 
4004
 
4250
 
-
246
 
Madhya 
Pradesh
 
3066
 
3667
 
-
601
 
8000
 
6108
 
1892
 
1430
 
2339
 
-
909
 
Maharashtra
 
6244
 
3877
 
2367
 
15653
 
7241
 
8412
 
2463
 
2689
 
-
226
 
Orissa
 
3724
 
2771
 
953
 
11451
 
5314
 
6137
 
1062
 
1697
 
-
635
 
Punjab
 
13770
 
7836
 
5934
 
34340
 
13078
 
21262
 
4960
 
4840
 
120
 
Rajasthan
 
1682
 
4368
 
-
2686
 
706
 
4939
 
-
4233
 
1498
 
3288
 
-
1790
 
Tamil Nadu
 
9061
 
37
93
 
5268
 
26984
 
9030
 
17954
 
2072
 
2506
 
-
434
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
7974
 
6732
 
1242
 
7850
 
6776
 
1074
 
1633
 
2899
 
-
1266
 
West Bengal
 
3864
 
5234
 
-
1370
 
***
 
***
 
***
 
2079
 
2668
 
-
589
 
All India
 
5681
 
4626
 
1055
 
9667
 
6418
 
3249
 
2115
 
2770
 
-
655
 
Note: All India includes small states Goa,
 
Delhi, Pondicherry,  North Eastern States & UTs.
 
Source: Computed using NSS unit level data 59
th
 
Round on Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers 2003.
 
 
Table 15
: Literacy and Mean Years of Education of Unorganized Agricultural Self
-
employed Workers, 2004
-
2005
 
Land Size/Class
 
Literacy Rate
 
Mean Years of Education
 
 
Male
 
Female
 
Total
 
Male
 
Female
 
Total
 
Landless
 
45.6
 
25.5
 
34.0
 
2.2
 
1.5
 
1.8
 
0.01 

 
0.40 ha
 
59.2
 
31.1
 
43.7
 
3.7
 
1.7
 
2.6
 
0.41 

 
1.00 ha
 
64.5
 
31.7
 
51.4
 
4.1
 
1.7
 
3.2
 
Marginal
 
62.5
 
31.2
 
48.1
 
3.9
 
1.7
 
2.9
 
Small
 
68.7
 
34.8
 
55.9
 
4.7
 
1.9
 
3.6
 
2.00 

 
4.00 ha
 
70.2
 
37.1
 
57.6
 
4.9
 
2.1
 
3.8
 
> 4.00 ha
 
77.4
 
42.0
 
63.3
 
5.8
 
2.5
 
4.5
 
Medium & Large
 
72.9
 
39.0
 
59.7
 
5.3
 
2.2
 
4.1
 
All
 
67.4
 
34.1
 
53.4
 
4.5
 
1.9
 
3.4
 
Source: NCEUS (2008) Computed using NSS unit level data 61
st
 
Rou
nd in Employment and Unemployment 
Situation in India.
 
 
Table 16
: Prevalence Rate of Indebtedness by Farm Size, All India (Percentage) 2003.
 
Land Size (ha)
 
Formal
 
Informal
 
Both
 
Total
 
<= 0.40
 
12.7
 
30.3
 
3.5
 
46.5
 
0.41 

 
1.00
 
18.8
 
21.7
 
4.6
 
45.0
 
1.01 

 
2.00
 
2
5.9
 
17.9
 
7.0
 
50.8
 
> 2.00
 
34.7
 
14.4
 
8.6
 
57.8
 
Total
 
20.4
 
23.0
 
5.3
 
48.6
 
Source: Computed using NSS unit level data 59
th
 
Round on Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers 2003.
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
 
 
Table 17
: Percentage Distribution of Outstanding Loans by Farm Size & Sources
 
(2003)
 
Source of Loan
 
Size Class of Land 
Possessed (hectares)
 
 
 
 
 
<=0.40
 
0.41 

 
1.00
 
1.01 

 
2.00
 
Above 2.00
 
Government
 
3.9
 
3.8
 
1.7
 
1.4
 
Co
-
operative society
 
14.1
 
17.0
 
2.5
 
22.8
 
Bank
 
24.4
 
32.0
 
35.4
 
42.6
 
Total: Institutional 
 
42.4
 
52.8
 
57.6
 
66.8
 
Agricul
tural/ 
Professional money 
lender
 
32.4
 
30.8
 
25.9
 
20.0
 
Trader
 
4.9
 
4.6
 
4.2
 
6.0
 
Relatives & friends
 
15.2
 
9.1
 
8.8
 
5.2
 
Doctor, lawyer & 
other professionals
 
1.4
 
0.7
 
0.8
 
0.8
 
Others
 
3.6
 
2.0
 
2.6
 
1.2
 
Total: Non
-
Institutional
 
57.6
 
47.2
 
42.4
 
33.2
 
Source: Computed
 
using NSS unit level data 59
th
 
Round on Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers 2003.
 
 
Table 18
: Percentage Distribution of outstanding loans by formal and informal source across size classes of land in 
selected states: 2003
 
State
 
Size  Class of Land owned
 
<0.01
 
0.0 I 
-
 
0.40
 
0.40 
-
 
1.00
 
1.01 
-
 
2.00
 
2.0 I 
-
 
4.00
 
4.01 
-
10.00
 
10.00+
 
All 
sizes
 
Foraml Sources
 
AP
 
16.9
 
19.3
 
25.1
 
26.6
 
41.5
 
48.6
 
49.5
 
31.4
 
Bihar
 
36.5
 
20.8
 
47.0
 
66.1
 
63.4
 
19.6
 
70.1
 
39.2
 
Maharashtra
 
58.3
 
83.2
 
80.2
 
78.8
 
83.8
 
88.7
 
91.1
 
83.8
 
Orissa
 
64.7
 
62.4
 
77.1
 
72.1
 
88.4
 
96.9
 
13.2
 
74.8
 
Punjab
 
24.8
 
29.2
 
65.6
 
49.1
 
61.2
 
47.5
 
30.1
 
47.9
 
Tamil Nadu
 
19.1
 
37.4
 
46.0
 
61.5
 
65.2
 
74.3
 
82.9
 
53.4
 
All India
 
22.6
 
43.3
 
52.8
 
57.6
 
65.1
 
68.8
 
67.6
 
57.7
 
 
 
Informal Sources
 
AP
 
83.2
 
80.9
 
75.0
 
73.4
 
58.4
 
51.4
 
50.5
 
68.5
 
Bihar
 
63.5
 
79.2
 
53.0
 
33.8
 
36.6
 
80.4
 
29.9
 
58.5
 
Maharashtra
 
41.6
 
16.8
 
19.8
 
21.1
 
16.2
 
11.3
 
8.9
 
16.2
 
Orissa
 
35.4
 
37.5
 
22.8
 
27.9
 
11.7
 
3.2
 
86.8
 
25.1
 
Punjab
 
75.2
 
71.0
 
34.5
 
50.9
 
38.8
 
52.4
 
70.0
 
52.1
 
Tamil Nadu
 
80.9
 
62.5
 
53.9
 
38.6
 
34.7
 
25.7
 
17.2
 
46.5
 
All India
 
77.4
 
56.7
 
47.2
 
42.4
 
34.0
 
31.2
 
32.8
 
42.3
 
Source: Calculated from NSSO (2005)
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
Fig 1. GDP growth in Agriculture in India
 
 
Source: Madhur 
(2011)
 
 
Fig 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
 
 
Fig 4
.1
 
 
 
 
Fig 4.2.
 
 
 
Fig 4.3
 
 
 
Fig 4.4
 
 
 
35
 
 
Fig 4.5
 
 
 
Fig 4.6
 
 
 
Fig 4.7
 
 
