Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Pest and Disease Management in Organic Ecosystem 
General  Immense commercialisation of agriculture has had a very negative 
effect on the environment. The use of pesticides has led to enormous levels 

of chemical buildup in our environment,
 in soil, water, air, in animals and 
even in our own bodies. Fertilisers have a short-term effect on productivity 

but a longer-term negative effect on 
the environment where they remain for 
years after leaching and running off, contaminating ground water and water 
bodies. The use of hybrid seeds and the practice of monoculture has led to a 
severe threat to local and indigenous varieties, whose germplasm can be lost 

for ever. All this for "productivity".  
 In the name of growing more to feed the earth, it has taken the 
wrong road of unsustainability. The effe
cts show - farmers committing suicide 
in growing numbers with every passing year; the horrendous effects of 

pesticide sprays,  pesticide contaminated bottled water and aerated 

beverages are only some instances. The bigger picture that rarely makes 

news however is that millions of people
 are still underfed, and where they do 
get enough to eat, the food
 they eat has the capability to eventually kill them. 
 Another negative effect of this trend has been on the fortunes of the 
farming communities worldwide. Despite 
this so-called increased productivity, 
farmers in practically every country ar
ound the world have seen a downturn 
in their fortunes. This is where organic farming comes in. Organic farming has 

the capability to take care of each 
of these problems. Besides the obvious 
immediate and positive effects organic or natural farming has on the 

environment and quality of food, it also 
greatly helps a farmer to become self-
sufficient in his requirements for ag
ro-inputs and reduce his costs.  
 Modern farming affects our world, by the way of land exhaustion, 
nitrate run off, soil erosion, soil comp
action, loss of cultivated biodiversity, 
habitat destruction, contaminated food and destruction of traditional 

knowledge systems and traditions. Thus to
 overcome the ill effects of modern 
agriculture, can be delineated by adopting organic farming. 
 
     
   Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Concepts of Organic Farming 
    
     
   
     
    Organic Agriculture
 Ecological
Social Economic Social justice and 
participation
 Viability, local 
resources
 Balances social, economic and ecological 
issues Biologically feasible, ecologically stable, 
economicall
y viable & sociall
y acce
ptable 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Principles of Organic Farming 
    
     Principles of 
Organic Farming
Health
Ecology
Care
FairnessPest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Modules in Organic Pest and Disease Management 
  Organic farming methods
 combine scientific knowledge of 
ecology and modern technology with tr
aditional farming practices based on 
naturally occurring biological processes. Organic farming methods are studied 

in the field of agroecology. While co
nventional agriculture uses synthetic 
pesticides and water-soluble syntheticall
y purified fertilizers, organic farmers 
are restricted by regulations to using 
natural pesticides and fertilizers. The 
principal methods of organic farming 
include crop rotation, green manures 
and compost, biological pest control,
 and mechanical cultivation. These 
measures use the natural environment to
 enhance agricultural productivity: 
legumes are planted to fix nitrogen into
 the soil, natural insect predators are 
encouraged, crops are rotated to confuse pests and renew soil, and natural 

materials such as potassium bicarbon
ate and mulches are used to control 
disease and weeds. Organic farmers are careful in their selection of plant 

breeds, and organic researchers produce hardier plants through plant 

breeding rather than genetic engineering. 
 In intensive farming systems, organic agriculture decreases yield; 
the range depends on the intensity of ex
ternal input used before conversion. 
In the green revolution areas (irri
gated lands and well endowed water 
regions), conversion to organic agriculture usually leads to almost identical 
Pheromone traps
Predators
Light trap
Botanicals
Resistant varieties
Altered date of 
sowing
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 yields. In traditional rain fed agricult
ure (with low external inputs), organic 
agriculture has shown the potentials to
 increase yields. A number of studies 
have shown that under drought conditions, crops in organic agriculture 
systems produce significantly and sustai
nably higher yields than comparable 
conventional agricultural crops, often out-yielding conventional crops by 7 - 

90 per cent. Others have shown that organic systems have less long-term 

yield variability.    Codex Alimentarius Commission, a 
joint body of FAO/WHO defines
 ﬁorganic agriculture as holistic food production management systems, which 
promotes and enhances agro-ecosystem health, including biodiversity, 
biological cycles and soil biological 
activity.  It emphasizes the use of 
management practices in preference to th
e use of off-farm inputs, taking into 
account that regional conditions requir
e locally adapted systems.  This is 
accomplished by using, where possible, 
agronomic, biological and mechanical 
methods, as opposed to using syntheti
c materials, to fulfil any specific 
function within the systemﬂ.    
Global View 
 The popularity of organic farmin
g is gradually increasing and now 
organic agriculture is practiced in almo
st all countries of the world, and its 
share of agricultural land and farms is
 growing. As per a recent report of 
International Federation of Organic Ag
riculture Movements (IFOAM) the total 
organically managed area is more th
an 24 million hectares world-wide. 
Organic farming is practiced in approx
imately 130 countries of the world and 
the area under organic management is continually growing. Although 

production of organic crops is increasing across the globe, sales are 

concentrated in the industrialized parts of the world. 
 In addition, the area of certified 
wild harvested plants is at least a 
further 10.7 million hectares, according 
to various certification bodies. The 
market for organic products is growing,
 not only in Europe and North America 
but also in many other countries. The global market for organic food has 

touched US$ 29 to 31 billions by 2005.  The demand for organic food is 

steadily increasing both in developed 
and developing countries, with annual 
average growth rate of 20-25%.  
Indian Status  Only 35% of India™s to
tal cultivable area is covered with fertilizers 
where irrigation facilities are availabl
e and in the remaining 65% of arable 
land, which is mainly rain-f
ed, negligible amount of fertilizers are being used.  
Farmers in these areas often use organic manure as a source of nutrients that 

are readily available either in their own 
farm or in their locality.  The north-
eastern region of India provides co
nsiderable scope and opportunity for 
organic farming due to least utilization of 
chemical inputs.  It is estimated that 
18 million hectare of such land is avai
lable in the North-East, which can be 
exploited for organic production.  Wit
h the sizable acreage under naturally 
organic/default organic cultivation, In
dia has tremendous potential to grow 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 crops organically and emerge as a major supplier of organic products in the 
world organic market.    
 The report of the Task Force on
 Organic Farming appointed by the 
Government of India also observed that
 in vast areas of the country, where 
limited amount of chemicals are used; productivity, could be exploited as 

potential areas for organic agriculture. 
 Arresting the decline of soil organic 
matter is the most potent weapon 
in fighting against unabated soil 
degradation and imperilled sustainability 
of agriculture in tropical regions of 
India, particularly those under the infl
uence of arid, semiarid and sub-humid 
climate.  Application of organic manure is the only option to improve the soil 

organic carbon for sustenance of so
il quality and future agricultural 
productivity.  Future of sustainable deve
lopment of agriculture, next to water, 
depends on arresting fall in organic matter in soils. 
Benefits of Organic Farming  Organic farming is beneficial fo
r both the humans and the nature. 
Some of the known benefits of organic farming are:  
 In organic farming, no fertilizers 
and pesticides are used, hence, no 
harmful synthetic chemicals rele
ased into the environment.   Organic farming improves productivi
ty of land by healing it with 
natural fertilizers.   Organic farms provide support to the diverse ecosystem by 
producing safe and healthy environment for humans, plants, insects 
and animals as well. 
  Organic farming is highly benefici
al for soil health. Due to the 
practices such as crop rotati
ons, inter-cropping, symbiotic 
associations, cover crops and minimum tillage, the soil erosion is 
decreased, which minimizes nut
rient losses and boosts soil 
productivity. The beneficial living 
organisms used in organic farming 
also help to improve the soil health. 
  It helps to promote sustainability by establishing an ecological 
balance. If organic farming techniques are used for long time, the 

farms tend to conserve energy and protect the environment by 

maintaining ecological harmony. 
  When calculated either per unit ar
ea or per unit of yield, organic 
farms use less energy and produce less waste.  
  Organic farming reduces groundwater pollution as no synthetic 
fertilizers and pesticides are used in this method.    Organic farming also helps to reduce the greenhouse effect and 
global warming because it has the 
ability to impound carbon in the 
soil.  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  In organic farming method, same
 crop is not located in the
 farm, which encourages the build-up of diseases and pests that plague 
that particular crop.
  The central activity of organic farming relies on 
fertilization, pest 
and disease control. 
Organic farming relies heavily on the natural 
breakdown of organic matter, using techniques like green manure and 

composting, to replace nutrients taken fr
om the soil by previous crops. This 
biological process, driven by microorga
nisms such as mycorrhiza, allows the 
natural production of nutrients in the 
soil throughout the growing season, and 
has been referred to as 
feeding the soil to feed the plant.   Organic farming tends to tolerate 
some pest populations while taking 
a longer-term approach. Organic pest and disease control involves the 

cumulative effect of many techniques, including: 
 allowing for an acceptable level of pest and disease damage;  
 encouraging predatory beneficial
 insects to control pests;  
 encouraging beneficial microorganis
ms and insects; this by serving 
them nursery plants and/or an alte
rnative habitat, usually in a form 
of a shelterbelt, hedgerow, or beetle bank  
 careful crop selection, choosing
 disease-resistant varieties  
 planting companion crops that discourage or divert pests;   using row covers to protect crops during pest migration periods;  
 using pest regulating plants and biologic pesticides, fungicides and 
herbicides   using no-till farming, and no-till farming techniques as false 
seedbeds  
 rotating crops to different locations from year to year to interrupt 
pest/disease reproduction cycles  Using insect traps to monitor and 
control insect populations that 
cause damage as well as transmit diseases.  
 Each of these techniques also provides other benefits viz., Soil 
protection and improvement, fertilizati
on, pollination, water conservation, 
season extension, etc.and these benefits are both complementary and 
cumulative in overall effect on farm he
alth. Effective organic pest and disease 
control requires a thorough understanding 
of pest life cycles and interactions. 
 Crop protection in organic agriculture is not a simple matter. It 
depends on a thorough knowledge of th
e crops grown and their likely pests, pathogens and weeds. Successful organic cr
op protection strategies also rely 
on an understanding of the effects which local climate, topography, soils and 

all aspects of the production system ar
e likely to have on crop performance 
and the possible host/pest complexes. Organic agriculture is rapidly 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 expanding and includes novel, edible, fibre and processing crops, diversified 
rotations and large scale stockless farming companies alongside traditional mixed organic farms. Many of the established strategies that have been 
developed to prevent and control weeds,
 pests and diseases in traditional 
organic systems have limited application 
in the more novel systems. Research 
is therefore urgently required to opti
mize these strategies for use in novel 
organic systems and necessary to develo
p new crop protection technologies, 
where pest, disease or weed problems are limiting expansion of the industry. 
 Pests/diseases are generally not a significant problem in organic 
systems, since healthy plants living in 
good soil with balanced nutrition are 
better able to resist pest/disease attack. However, major pest/disease 

damage is sometimes seen in organic 
crops, which are very susceptible to 
damage. Pest/disease problems can be pa
rticularly severe in large holdings, 
where several hectares of a single crop species may be grown. Pest/disease 
control strategies in organic farming sy
stems are mainly preventative rather 
than curative. The balance and management of cropped and uncropped 

areas, crop species and variety choice 
and the temporal and spatial pattern of 
the crop rotations used all aim to mainta
in a diverse population of beneficial 
organisms including competitors, parasites and predators of pests. Damaging 

populations of pests and pathogens are le
ss likely to establish in soils that 
sustain high levels of beneficial organisms. Break crop choice and rotation 

design can have a major impact on the incidence and severity of certain types 

of pest problems. The less mobile pests or those which have a specific or 

narrow host range are particularly suscep
tible to crop rotation. Highly mobile, 
often non-specific pests such as aphi
ds are less affected, or unaffected by 
rotation design. Reactive treatments 
for pest outbreaks, including natural 
pesticides, are permitted under regulations for specific situations in organic 

systems, but cultural pest prevention 
techniques including the use of break 
crops within balanced rotations will re
main the most important means for pest 
control in organic systems. 
Managing Pests and Diseases 
 Managing the ecosystem on an organic farm is very challenging.  It 
is made even more complex when factor
ing in insect and disease pests. Since 
the use of synthetic pesticides are prohibited, the organic cropping system 
should be focused on the 
prevention
 of pest outbreaks rather than coping 
with them after they occur. No single 
method is likely to be adequate for all 
pests. Successful pest management depends on the incorporation of a 
number of control strategies. Some strate
gies will target insect and disease 
separately and others wi
ll target them together. 
 Pests in a crop do not automatically 
result in damage or yield loss. In 
some instances, low levels of pest feed
ing have been shown to increase crop 
yields. Once infestation levels reach a certain point, however, they can 
produce economic losses. Thresholds vary with the crop and the pest in 
question and must be closely monitored by the producer. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Planning for effective insect and disease management must involve 
the entire farm operation and use all in
formation available. Any strategy in 
organic farming should include methods for: 
 insect and disease avoidance  
 managing the growth environment  
 direct treatment i. Avoidance Techniques 
 To manage pests and diseases effectively, producers need to 
understand the biology and growth habits of both pest and crop. The type 
and concentration of pests are often resp
onses to previous crop history, pest 
life cycles, soil conditions and local weather patterns. 
Crop Rotations  Crop rotation is central to all sustainable farming systems. It is an 
extremely effective way to minimize most pest problems while maintaining 
and enhancing soil structure and fertility. 
Diversity is the key to a successful cr
op rotation program.  It involves: 
 rotating early-seeded, late-seeded and fall-seeded crops  
 rotating between various crop types, such as annual, winter annual, 
perennial, grass and broadleaf crops; each of these plant groups has 
specific rooting habits, competitive abilities, nutrient and moisture 
requirements. (True diversity does not include different species 
within the same family - for exampl
e, wheat, oats and barley are all 
species of annual cereals.)  
 incorporating green manure crops, 
into the soil to suppress pests, 
disrupt their life cycles and to provid
e the additional benefits of fixing 
nitrogen and improving soil properties  
 managing the frequency with which a crop is grown within a rotation  
 maintaining the rotation's divers
ified habitat, which provides 
parasites and predators of pests with alternative sources of food, 
shelter and breeding sites  
 planting similar crop species as far 
apart as possible. Insects such as 
wheat midge and Colorado potato b
eetle, for example, are drawn to 
particular host crops and may over
winter in or near the previous 
host crops. With large distances 
to move to get to the successive 
crop, the insects' arrival may be delayed. The number that find the 
crop may be reduced as well.  
 Diverse rotations are particularly e
ffective in regulating flea beetles, 
cabbage butterfly, wheat midge, wheat st
em maggot and wheat stem sawfly.  
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Rotations are also effective in 
controlling soil- and stubble-borne 
diseases. The success of rotations in 
preventing disease depends on many 
factors, including the ability of a pathog
en to survive withou
t its host and the 
pathogen's host range. Those with a wi
de range of hosts will be controlled 
less successfully. For example, scleroti
nia stem-rot is a common disease in 
conventionally grown canola on the Prairi
es, but it can also infect at least a 
halfdozen other field crops. Rotations wi
ll not have much effect on pathogens 
that live indefinitely in the soil, but wi
ll shorten the life span
 of pathogens that 
can survive only brief periods apart from
 their hosts. Other situations that 
limit the benefit of crop rotations incl
ude: the transmission of pathogens via 
seed, the presence of susceptible weeds and volunteer crops that harbour 
pathogens, and the invasion of pathogens by wind and other means.  
 Rotations should be used with othe
r cultural practices to achieve the 
greatest benefit. 
Field Sanitation/Crop Residue Management
  Reducing or removing crop residu
es and alternate host sites can be 
used to control some insects and many
 diseases. Incorporating the residue 
into the soil hastens the destruction of
 disease pathogens by beneficial fungi 
and bacteria. Burying diseased plant mate
rial in this manner also reduces the 
movement of spores by wind.  Insects most affected by tillage wi
ll be those that overwinter in crop 
residue (for example, European corn 
borer and wheat stem sawfly) and those 
that lay their eggs in the residue. Co
nversely, fields where residue has not 
been disturbed may have higher levels of
 some beneficial predaceous insects, 
which may reduce levels of insect pe
sts such as root maggots in canola. 
Reduced or zero-tillage may also reduce
 the damage by certain pests, as the 
crop residue creates a micro-climate less preferred by some insects (for 
example, flea beetles).  
 It is important to maintain a ba
lance between crop sanitation and 
soil conservation. Lighter soils and th
ose prone to wind and water erosion 
may require postponing tillage until ju
st before seeding to ensure stubble 
cover for as long as possible.  Alternate host sites, such as fi
eld margins, fence lines, pastures, 
shelterbelts and riparian areas, wi
ll usually contain weeds and natural 
vegetation that may serve as reservoirs for disease, vectors of disease and 
insect pests. Left uncontrolled, these insect and disease pests can be 
transmitted to healthy crop plants. Insects may use these plants as alternate 
habitat until an appropriate crop occurs
 in a nearby field. However, these 
areas may also host many beneficial insects and predators, therefore the 
grower must carefully assess the potent
ial threat from pest insects in these 
areas before mowing or removing any plants. The ecological importance of 
areas such as sloughs, wooded bluffs, ro
ad allowances, railroad rights-of-way, 
abandoned farmyards and schoolyards must also be included in long-range 
planning. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Seed Quality  The use of high-quality seed is especially important in preventing 
disease. The seed supply should be free of smut, ergot bodies or other 

sclerotia, and free of kernels showing 
symptoms of Fusarium head blight 
infection.  
 Seed analysis by a reputable seed testing laboratory will help 
determine specific diseases in the seed supply. 
 Relatively few diseases are exclusively seed-borne, and it is more 
common for pathogens to be transmitted from soil, stubble, or wind, as well 

as with the seed. 
 Planting physically sound seed is 
also important.  In crops such as 
flax, rye and pulses, a crack in the seed coat may serve as an entry point for 
soil-borne micro-organisms that rot the seed once it is planted.  
Weed Management  Although weeds need to be controll
ed to reduce their impact on crop 
yield and quality, a field completely fr
ee of weeds is not necessarily the best 
objective. In many cases, weeds prov
ide food and shelter for beneficial 
insects. Parasitic wasps, for example,
 are attracted to certain weeds with 
small flowers. Field experience has shown that the number of predators 
attacking insects increases and the 
number of aphids and leafhoppers 
decreases on certain crops as the diversity of weeds (that act as host plants) 
increases. Research has shown that outbreaks of certain crop insect pests are 
more likely in weed-free fields.  Insects that are generalist feeders,
 such as beet webworm, thistle 
caterpillars and grasshoppers, may prefer
 to feed on weeds rather than some 
crops, only damaging the crop after the weeds are eaten. 
 Each field situation should be considered separately, as weed 
competition must always be taken into
 account. Sometimes mowing weeds at 
the edge of the field results in beneficial organisms moving into the crop 
where they are needed. 
Forecasting  Producers should pay attention to 
the forecasts for various pest and 
disease infestations for each crop year. Maps of these forecasts are usually 
available for many of the major destruct
ive insects such as grasshoppers and 
wheat midge, as well as some diseases
. Agro meteorological warning and 
forecast can help in this way. Record-Keeping
  Keeping diligent field records can provide very useful information. A 
complete history of each field shou
ld include any insect or disease 
infestations, which management methods worked and which did not, and a 
list of management techniques to try in the future. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 ii. Managing the Growth Environmen
t - Giving the Crop a Head Start  Any crop management technique 
that contributes to a vigorous, 
competitive crop is a tool of insect and disease management. Producers must 
also be mindful that many practices th
at work well in conventional systems 
may not benefit organic systems. Certai
n crop species, crop varieties and 
equipment may work well in one system but not in the other. 
Healthy Soil  Maintaining favorable soil condit
ions is the first line of defense 
against pests. A biologically active soil
 with good drainage supports vigorous 
crop growth, allowing a higher level of crop competition with weeds.  
 Adequate, balanced soil nutrition is
 essential for crop quality, yield 
and moisture-use efficiency. The applicat
ion of nutrients should be based on a 
sound soil testing program, accompan
ied by plant tissue analysis when 
diagnosing problems. High levels of nitrogen can occur after a high-nitrogen 
plowdown, such as sweet clover. This re
sults in lush leaf tissue and a dense 
plant canopy that provides an idea
l environment for plant pathogens. However, a lush crop may also help disperse the damage by a given number 
of insects, so astute observations by the producer are necessary at all times. 
 In contrast, inadequate soil phos
phorous can pre-dispose to certain 
root diseases. Low levels of nitrogen can reduce the incidence of insect 
outbreaks. A shortage of micronutrients 
such as zinc or copper can result in 
disease-like symptoms on crops, while too much of any one micronutrient 
may be toxic.  The addition of composted livestock manure improves soil quality, 
including increasing the population of 
soil micro-organisms that compete with 
soil-borne plant pathogens. 
 Field experience has also shown th
at plants fertilized by the slow 
release of nutrients from compost are more resistant to insects and diseases 
than crops fertilized by highly solu
ble nutrients. Soil testing becomes 
important when applying compost regula
rly. An imbalance of nutrients can 
easily occur if the soil's nutrient profile is not continuously monitored. 
Crop and Variety Selection
  Producer awareness of insects and diseases in the proximity of the 
farm is very important and should infl
uence the crop and the variety of crop 
to be grown. These choices must also fi
t in with the crop rotation plan that 
has been developed. Some insect pests ar
e specific to certain crops, such as 
wheat stem sawfly, while ot
hers, such as grasshoppers, will attack numerous 
crops. The situation is similar with diseases. 
  The selection of insect- and disease-resistant cultivars can be a 
useful tool, but under no circumstances 
can genetically modified varieties be 
used in organic systems.  Wheat variet
ies with solid stems are more resistant 
to wheat stem sawfly than hollow-ste
mmed varieties. Wheat varieties with 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 resistance to wheat midge have been developed and should soon be 
available. These insect-resistant 
varieties were developed through 
conventional plant breeding programs. Certain species may avoid diseases 
such as Fusarium head blight, but often agronomic factors, such as time of 
seeding or choosing winter versus spring wheat, have more of an influence on 
the incidence of disease.  Plants also vary in their degree of attractiveness to insects, diseases 
and vectors transmitting disease. Factor
s such as leaf and stem toughness, 
pubescence, nutrient content, plant arch
itecture, growth habit and differences 
in maturity between crops and vari
eties can influence pest growth, 
reproduction and host preference. Fo
r example, earlier-maturing crop 
varieties may be less attractive to migr
ating populations of grasshoppers late 
in the season compared to later-maturing varieties. 
Intercropping
  The practice of intercropping (where two crops are grown at the 
same time) can reduce pest problems by making it more difficult for the pests 
to find a host crop. This technique 
also provides habitat for beneficial 
organisms. Strip-cropping row crops wi
th perennial legumes often leads to 
better pest control. In particular, alfa
lfa attracts many beneficial organisms 
that can destroy insect pests in neighbouring crops. 
Seeding Date  Planting should be scheduled so that the most susceptible time of 
plant growth does not correspond to th
e peak in pest cycles. Early seeding 
reduces crop damage caused by grasshoppers, aphids in cereal crops, wheat 
midge in spring wheat, barley yellow
 dwarf virus in barley and wheat, 
powdery mildew in peas and pasmo in flax. 
 Delayed seeding can be effective in avoiding wireworms and 
cutworms in cereal crops, Hessian fly in winter wheat, barley thrips, 
Ascochyta in lentils and wheat streak mo
saic virus in winter wheat. However, 
experience on the Prairies has generally
 shown that delaying seeding too long 
can reduce a crop's potential yield. 
Seeding Rate  Using a higher seeding rate to affect insect or disease infestations 
may have different results. More plants 
in a field may reduce the impact of a 
given aphid population on individual plants, but they may create a more 
favourable habitat for insects that prefer a dense canopy, such as true 
armyworm. A dense leaf canopy can also create a moist soil surface and 
elevated humidity within the crop, conditions favourable to certain leaf 
disease pathogens. 
 Reducing the seeding rate may decr
ease the severity of take-all in 
spring wheat, but the reduced canopy 
may also allow weeds to invade. In 
other crops, reduced seeding may also produce more insect damage, as in 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 the case of aphids, flea beetles and leafhoppers, which are attracted to the 
contrast between a green host
 and a dark soil background. 
Depth and Timing of Seeding
  Optimum seeding depth is also impo
rtant. Deep seeding in cold soils 
may result in seedling blights and dampin
g-off, especially in pulses and small-
seeded crops. Seeding depth should gene
rally be no deeper than required for 
quick germination and even emergence. Variables include seed size, soil type 
and moisture conditions. If the soil 
is loose before seeding, a packing 
operation will firm up the soil and br
ing moisture closer to the surface. 
 For most crops, seeding should ideally be done when the soil is 
warm enough for rapid germination. S
eeds that remain ungerminated in cool 
soil are more susceptible to damage
 by insects such as wireworms. 
Trap Strips  Seeding trap strips around the edge of a cropped field or along a 
fence row helps lure insect pests to a specific area where they can be 
managed more easily. For example, planting bromegrass near a wheat field 
attracts wheat stem sawflies and their 
native parasites away from the wheat 
crop. Similarly, a trap strip of potato
es planted much earlier than the main 
crop would attract Colorado potato b
eetles to the area. The strip could be 
worked under along with the adult beetles, eggs and larvae before the second 
generation of beetles spreads to the main crop. 
 Generally, the insect pests in the trap strips are controlled by 
mowing or cultivating the strip, or by 
applying an acceptable organic product, 
such as 
Bacillus thuringiensis
. Trap strips can also act as a barrier to protect 
the crop field. Producers have found that planting yellow sweet clover or 
Sirius field peas repels grasshoppers and prevents them from damaging 
crops. A thorough knowledge of the crop and insect pests of the area is 
necessary to prevent this technique from backfiring. 
Tillage  Tillage can be properly timed before seeding, after harvesting and 
during summerfallow to reduce population
s of insect pests such as cutworms 
and grasshoppers that spend part of thei
r life cycles in the soil or stubble. 
Tillage can help starve insects in the sp
ring or during fallow, prevent adults 
from laying eggs in the soil and expose overwintering insects to predators and 
inclement weather. Roguing  Roguing refers to the labour-intensi
ve practice of walking the fields 
to remove diseased or insect-infested 
plants. Roguing may not be practical for 
large fields, but could be suitable for seed plots or crops having highly 
infectious and destructive diseases (f
or example, bacterial blackleg in 
potatoes and certain viruses in other crops).  
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 iii. Direct Treatment 
 At times, the organic producer will find that, despite all the best 
efforts, an insect or disease pest will grow to levels that cause substantial 
crop damage. At this point, direct treatment may be necessary. 
Monitoring  Insect monitoring traps are useful in determining which insect pests 
are present in a field and whether they 
are at economically important levels. 
It is imperative that the producer has a 
positive identification of the insect or 
disease causing damage before choosing a method of treatment.  
 Certain types of insect hormones called pheromones may be used as 
attractants to monitor population levels
 of insects such as bertha armyworm, 
diamondback moth, cabbage looper and Eu
ropean corn borer, or to simply 
attract insects into a trap. Biological Control
  In a healthy, balanced ecosystem, biological control by natural 
predators is constantly occurring. The more diverse a cropping system 
becomes, the greater the spectrum of
 insect species and micro-organisms 
within it. This leads to the developmen
t of more natural predators within the 
ecosystem.   Ladybugs, ambush bugs, hoverfly 
larvae, lacewings, spiders, birds, 
frogs, toads and a host of other insects are predators of aphids, bertha 
armyworm larvae, sunflower beetles, 
beet webworms, and both grasshopper 
eggs and adults. The destructive wheat mi
dge may also be partially controlled 
by a parasitic wasp, but crop
 damage may still occur. 
 Various types of fungi are insect 
parasites and can either kill their 
insect hosts or reduce their ability to reproduce. Very few biological controls 
are available to reduce the effects of
 plant diseases, as most commercial 
products do not perform well if the disease is already established in the crop. 
Mycoparasitism is a form of bio-contro
l where one fungus parasitizes another. 
Although this process occurs with many
 fungi under laboratory conditions, it 
hasn't been successful under field conditions. 
Natural Insecticides
  Organic certification standards prohibit the use of synthetic 
pesticides. Permitted disease-manageme
nt products include copper (fixed 
copper and copper sulphate), lime-sulphur mixes, elemental sulphur, vinegar, 
soap and silica. Bordeaux mixture is co
nsidered a restricted substance, and 
farmers should contact their certifying 
body before using it. Although these 
products are allowed, it may not be cost
-effective or feasible to apply them to 
field crops. Scientific evidence on pr
oduct efficacy should be researched 
before using them.  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  The high risk of phytotoxicity should also be considered when using 
these products on certain plants; ofte
n the margin of error between benefit 
and damage to the plant is very small.
 In addition, there are environmental 
and ecological concerns surrounding some of these products. Additional soil 

tests may be required to monitor coppe
r and sulphur levels in the soil. As 
well, organic certification may be denied to farms that overuse or depend on 

such products.   Insecticides permitted in organic agriculture include some microbial 
insecticides containing the bacteria 
Bacillus thuringiensis
. Three main strains 
of these bacteria are used in insect co
ntrol. One strain, marketed as Dipel or 
Thuricide, kills only th
e larvae of moths or bu
tterflies. Another strain, 
marketed as Novodor, is for beetle larvae only and can be used to control 

Colorado potato beetles. The third strain
 is specifically for mosquito and fly 
larvae.   Botanical insecticides, such as rotenone, are also permitted in 
organic agriculture, but they are often too expensive to use on large 
acreages.  Other Control Methods  For pest control, beneficial orga
nisms, dormant oil, diatomaceous 
earth, plant-derived pesticides, soap, na
tural and synthetic insect pheromones 
which disrupt the insect's developmen
t, and commercial insect vacuums can 
be used.  
Grain Storage  When stored grain is dry and its temperature is low, problems 
seldom arise. But if the grain is warm and moist, insects and fungi can 
multiply rapidly. A grain temperature of
 5°C to 10°C is adequate for long-term 
storage. Bin aeration helps dry and cool
 the grain. If bins are not equipped 
with aeration systems, grain can be mo
ved to cool it. Cold temperatures can 
be used to control insects that exist in stored grain.  
 Before storing new grain, the bin 
should be thoroughly cleaned with 
a grain vacuum. The empty bin can be treated with diatomaceous earth to 
control stored-grain insects. Many organic producers have found it to be 
effective when applied as a light coatin
g on the floor of the bin, and around 
the walls and the bin door. It can also be added to the grain as it is being 
brought into storage.   Natural products for Pest Control 
 Using various naturally occurring substances and products 
Eg. Neem, pongamia, NPV, Trichograma, Trichoderma etc 
  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Community Management 
 Pest incidence depends not only on the crop a farmer grows and 
practices he/she follows but also on the neighboring cropping 
pattern and the practices adopted. 
List of inputs permitted for crop protection 
S. No. Input
 Permitted / Restricted
 1. Mechanical traps, Neem oil and other preparations, 
Propalis, Pheromones in traps, plant based repellants, 

Silicates, Soft soap 
Permitted 2. Copper salts, Chloride of lime/soda, light mineral oils, 
permanganate of potash, Sulphur, Viral, fungal and 

bacterial preparations, release of parasite and 

predators of insect pests Restricted 
All-round Herbal Pesticide 
 Herbal extracts should be used only as a final remedy only after 
utilizing & practicing all the above said
 methods. One should try to use only 
the locally available weeds or those that
 are grown as life fence for making 
herbal extracts. If enough materials 
are not available in and around the 
garden, then materials can be collected fr
om other areas. To be self sufficient 
it is better to develop the herbal plant resources by raising them as hedges 

along the fence, in the waste areas like
 slopes, gullies, & rocky patches and 
along the path. 
Basic important procedures to be followed while preparing the herbal extracts 
are:   Macerate and grind the plant material 
to a pulp state. This is mainly 
to expose the cells and facilitate the 
extraction of the active principle 
with the help of water.  Soak the pulped material in at least 70-80% of the final volume of 
spray solution.  Since the water has a limited disso
lving capacity, with low volume 
the extraction will not be full.  Soak the pulped material only for 3-
5 days. If it is allowed to ferment 
for more number of days the active principles from the herbs that 
are needed to kill the insects will disintegrate into simpler harmless 

component. 
 After 3 - 5 days of fermentation
, the whole solution should be 
filtered and the final spray volume
 should be made by adding the 
balance water.  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  The filtered final solution has to 
be sprayed in such a way that the 
whole plant is fully drenched at le
ast one or two times in a year.  
 To avoid soaking for 3-4 days, soak
 it at least overnight and then 
heat it to bearable warmth (60-70°C) for an hour by stirring. After 

this dilute it to the required fina
l volume of spray solution, filter, 
allow cooling and spraying.  
 Use at least 2-3 different materials 
at a time to prepare the herbal 
extract.  Change the combination of the materials every time.  
 Use 2-3% of herbal extract (combination of 2-3 different materials) 
while the pest attack is at early st
age. Increase the dosage to 5-6% 
if the attack is very severe.  
 The first two sprays in a season should by a blanket spray, on 
observing the attack. 
Commonly available plants that can be us
ed for making herbal extracts are as 
follows 
S. No. 
Common Name Botanical Name
 Useful Plant Parts
 1. Neem  
Azadirachta indica 
Neem Cake 
2. Pungam  
 Pongamia glabra 
Pongamia pinnata 
Leaf & flower 

 3. Notchi  
Vitex nugunda 
Leaf & flower 
4. Nithia Kalyani  
Catharanus rosea 
Whole plant 5. Unni  
Lantana camera 
Leaf & flower 
6. Devils Trumpet  
Datura metal 
Leaf, fruit, flower 
7. Yellow Nelliam  
Nerium thevetifolia 
Flower, fruit, root 
8. Aruku  
Calatropis gigantea 
Leaf, tender stem, 

flower 9. Siria Nangai  
Andrographis paniculata 
Whole plant 10. Parthenium  
Parthenium sp 
Plant before flowering 11. Adathoda  
Adathoda vasica 
Leaf 
12. Tobacco  
Nicotiana tobaccum Dried leaf, plant 

waste, stem waste 13. Chevanthi  
Crysanthemum 
cinerrifolia 
Flower 
14. Thumbai  
Lucus aspera 
Flower, leaf, tender 

stem 15. Tobacco Plant 
(weed)  Lobilia sp Whole plant 16. Ginger  
Zingiber officinale 
Rhizome Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 17. Etti  
Strychnos nuvomica 
Seeds 
18. Turmeric  
Curcuma longa 
Rhizome 19. Artemesia 
Artemesia vulgaris 
 Tender shoots & 

leaves Companion planting to repel fungal disease  Amorphophallus plants between rows of arecanut trees have anti-
fungal qualities.  
General purpose insecticide 
 Crush the nuts of the casaraka tree (Nuxvomica) and add to coconut 
milk.   The combination becomes lethal an
d appropriate concentrations can 
be sprayed on different insect pests.  
To treat paddy leaf curl 
 Steep one kilo of agave leaves in 10 litres of boiling water in a 
copper container and allow to stand for 24 hours.  
 Spray the extract on the crop.  
To tackle Rhinoceros beetle in coconut plantation:  
 Arrange two to three tubelights in 
various spots in the plantation so 
that the beetles are drawn to the light instead of to the coconut 
trees during the night!  
 However, in the long run this could be harmful since many predators 
are also attracted to the light!   Neem oil is mixed with honey in equal proportions and sprayed on 
the apical part of the tree.  
Liquid extracts for disease management 
  Disease Type of compost 
Late blight of potato ,tomato
 Horse compost extract
 Gray mold on beans strawberries Cattle compost extract 
Downy and powdery mildew of 
grapes 
Animal manure-straw compost 
extract 
Powdery mildew on cucumbers Animal manure-straw compost 
extract 
Gray mold on tomato, pepper Cattle  and chicken manure compost 
extract 
Apple scab Spent mushroom compost extract 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Biological agents to control pests of different crops 
S. No. 
Biological Agents
 Pest Crop 
1. Trichogramma brassiliensis
 - 
1.0 
cc/ac. once in 10 days, 

(Egg parasitoid) 
Lepidopteran, Heliothis sp 

 Cotton, Tomato 
 2. Trichogramma chilonis - 2 cc/ac once in 15 days 
Borers Sugarcane, 
paddy, 
pulses, 
Vegetables 
3. Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus 
(NPV) 

100-200 LE/ac Spodoptera sp & 
Heliothis sp 

 Vegetables 
4. Chrysoperla Sp 
5000 - 10000 eggs /ha, 3 - 4 

times 
in 15 days, (Green lace wing) Prudenia, 
Caterpillars, 
White 
flies, thrips, 

aphids 
Vegetables 
 5. Beauveria bassiana
 - 1.0% Affects the young stage, 
 Helicoperva, 
spodoptera, 
borers, 
hairy caterpillars, 
mites, scales, etc 
Vegetables, cereals, 

fruits 
 6. Metarhizium anisopliae 
- 0.5 - 1.0 % 
affects all stages 
 White grubs, Beetle grubs, 
caterpillars, 
Semiloopers, 
mealy bugs, BPH 
Sugarcane, 
groundnut, rice, 

potato, cotton, 
cereals  7. Verticillium lecanii
 - 0.5 - 1.0 
%, 

affects all stages 
All sucking soft bodies insects Sugarcane, 
groundnut, rice, 

potato, cotton, 

cereals 8. Phascilomycetes  Nematodes All crops 
9. Bacillus thuringiensis
 var 
kustaki 0.3 - 0.4 % 
 Helicoperva, 
spodoptera, 
borers, 
hairy caterpillars, 
mites, scales, etc 
Vegetables, cereals, 

fruits 
 10. NPV - Nuclear Polyhedrosis 
Virus 

of Spodotera litura 250 - 500 

ml/ ha 2 - 3 time at 10 days 

interval Spodotera litura 
Cotton, 
groundnut, 

pulses, cabbage, 

chillies 
11. NPV - Nuclear Polyhedrosis 
Helicoverpa 
Cotton, Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Virus 
of Helicoverpa armigera 250 

500 
ml/ ha, 2 - 3 
time at 10 days interval 
armigera  groundnut, 
pulses, cabbage, 

chillies 
Biopesticides and IPM products for various crops 
Crop Pest/Diseases Biopesticides 
Cotton Bollworms Traps, lures, BT, NPV, 
Trichogramma Whitefly, jassids, thrips  Neem 1500 ppm 
Mites Chrysoperla, verticillium, 
Baeuveria 
Wilts and leaf spots Trichoderma, Pseudomonas 
Rice Yellow stem borer, leaf folder Traps, lures, BT, Trichogramma 
Hoppers Neem 1500 ppm, Baeuveria 
Sheath blight and leaf spots  
Pulses Bollworms or cutworms
 Traps, lures, BT, NPV, 
Trichogramma Wilts Trichoderma, Pseudomonas 
Tomato, 
capsicum Heliothis Traps, lures, BT, NPV, 
Trichogramma Mites Trichoderma, Pseudomonas 
Brinjal, okra Fruit borer Traps, lures, BT, NPV, 
Trichogramma Mites Neem 1500 ppm, verticillium 
Pest/Disease Management Packages for Different Crops 
Integrated Pest Management package for Organic Rice Ecosystem 
 Rice is essentially a crop of warm, humid environments conducive to 
the survival and Proliferation of insect
s. More than 70 species were recorded 
as pests of rice and about 20 have ma
jor significance. Together, they infest 
all parts of the plant at all growth stag
es. The insects act as vectors of virus 
diseases, and are a major factor responsibl
e for low rice yields particularly in 
Tropical Asia, the world™s rice bowl. The 
insect problem is accentuated in multi 
cropping or dormancy but occurs th
roughout the year in over lapping 
generations. The yield losses vary from
 20 to 50 per cent due to the damage 
caused by various insect Pests. 
 Mechanical control methods  Collection and destruction of rice st
ubbles from field after harvest as 
they harbour egg, larvae, pupae of 
stem borer, gall midge, white tip 
nematode and root knot nematodes.  
 Clipping the tips of the seedlings up
 to 2 inches prior to transplanting 
to remove the egg masses of stem borer if any. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Collection of egg masses of stem borer and silver shoots from the 
nursery seedlings.  Flooding the nursery to make the hiding
 larvae in the soil to come to 
the surface and thus they are picked by the birds (army worm) 
 A rope may be passed over the young
 crop for dislodging the larval 
cases from the tillers and then the water should be drained for 
eliminating them (case worm). 
 Providing bird perches of 2-3 ft height in vegetative stage @ 15-20 / 
acre. They should be removed after seed setting to avoid the bird 
damage to seeds. Drinking pots 
with water should be provided 
around the perches. 
 Collection and destruction of egg masses of stem borer and ear head 
bugs in main field. 
 A thorny hedge may be passed over the crop when it is affected by 
leaf folder to unfold the leaf folds 
and to expose the larvae within to 
natural enemies and botanical sprays. 
Cultural control methods  Avoid close planting especially in 
BPH and leaf folder prone areas or 
seasons.   For every 5-6 m leave a spacing of 75 cm (hoppers). 
 Grow horse gram, green gram, soy bean on bunds to attract natural 
enemies.   Controlled irrigation by in
termittent draining (BPH). 
 Remove the weeds on bunds that ha
rbour BPH, gall midge, GLH, leaf 
folder, ear head bug. Biological control methods 
 The crop should be observed from 20 DAT and when stem borer 
eggs are observed on leaf tips and leaf folder eggs on veins, release 
Trichogramma chilonis
 (for leaf folder) and 
T. japonicum
 (for stem 
borer) thrice @ 1,00,000/ha each and spray 
Bacillus thuringiensis
 @ 
1.0 kg/ha when the stem borer / leaf folder crosses ETL. 
 Release Platygaster oryzae parasitized galls @ 1 per 10 m
2 on 10 
days after transplanting (DAT) (gall midge). 
Botanical control methods 
 Spray neem seed kernel extract, neem oil, pungam oil (5%) on need 
base at 15 days interval. Teepol or soap solution should be mixed at 
2 ml / litre (general). 
 Apply  Acorus calamus killikulam dust @ 10 kg / ac (ear head bug). 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Behavioural control methods 
 Install pheromone traps @ 8 / acre (stem borer and leaf folder)  
 Installation of light traps with inca
ndescent light at 1-2 m height @ 4 
/ acre to monitor the population (s
tem borer, leaf folder, BPH, gall 
midge and ear head bugs). At the base of light trap put a tub filled 

with water to which kerosene was added to kill the trapped insects. 
Rat management    Collection and destruction of weeds and maintenance of field 
sanitation.  Reduce the width of bunds and close the rat burrows. 
 Use different types of rat traps alternatively to trap the rats. 
 Insects of different stages in rice 
Vegetative Phase 
Crop stage Possible pests 
Seedling Rice whorl maggot; Thrip; Defoliator; Stem 
borer; Green leaf hopper; Plant hopper 
Tillering Thirp; Defoliator, Stemborer; Green leaf 
hopper; plant hopper 
Minor pests (vegetative 
phase)  
Aphids, caseworm, black bugs, grasshoppers, 
mealy bugs 
Reproductive stage Crop stage Possible pests 
Stem elongation Defoliator; Stem borer; Greenleaf 
hopper; Plant hopper
 Panicle initiation to booting Stem
 borer; Green leaf hopper; Plant 
hopper Heading Plant hopper 
Flowering Plant hopper; Thrips 
Minor pests (reproductive phase)  Greenhorned caterpillars, skippers 
Mature grain stage 
Plant hopper; Rice bug 
Dough grain stage 
Mature grain 
Minor pests (reproductive phase) Panicle mite 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Diseases in rice  Disease Important 
Stages 
Symptoms 
Important 
Season Factors favoring infection 
Blast All growth 
stages Leaf lesions- 
Grey Centers 

 large in the 

middle tapering 
to ends Also 

attacks nodes 
 on stem 

Panicle attack 
(neck rot) can 

be confused 

 with stem 

border damage 
Mostly wet 
cloudy skies 

Frequent 
rain and 

drizzle High N 
levels, High 
relative 
humidity Sheath Blight Tillering Leaf sheath - 
Grayish green 

lesions 
between the 

water  and the 

leaf blade 
Periodic High 
temperature 
and humidity 
High levels of 

N Bacterial 
Leaf Blight 
Tillering to 
heading 
Leaf lesions run 
along the 
 length of the 

leaf Wet High temperature 
and humidity Sheath Rot Boot leaf Small water 
soaked lesions 

 on leaves 
Periodic High 
temperature 
and humidity Brown Spot Flowering 
to maturity Brown round to 
oval spots  on 

leaves Periodic 25-30 
degrees  
centigrade 
temp  & High 
humidity False smut Flowering 
and 
maturity Ovaries transformed to 

large green 
masses 
Periodic Rainfall 
accompanied 
by  cloudy 

days 
Tungro virus Flowering 
and maturity Stunting of the 
plant &  yellow 
to orange laves Periodic Usage of 
more N  and 
more vector 

 activity   Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Economic Threshold Levels (ETLs) of Major Pests of Rice 
Insect Pest Economic Threshold Level 
Stem borer 10% dead hearts or 2 egg masses / m
2 2% white ears Gall midge 10% silver shoots 
Green leafhopper 60/25 net sweeps or 5/hill at vegetative stage or 
10/hill at flowering or 2/hill in tungro endemic area 
Brown plant hopper 
 2 / tiller when 1 spider / hill is present 
1 / tiller when spiders are not present 
Whorl maggot 25% damaged leaves 
Case worm 10% damaged leaves 
Leaf folder 

 10 % leaf damage in vegetative phase 
5% at flowering 
Ear head bug 
 5 bugs/100 ear heads at flowering and 16 bugs/100 
ear heads from milky stage to grain maturity 
Thrips  60 numbers in 12 passes or rolling of the first and 
second leaves in 10% of seedlings.  Biocontrol module for pest and disease management  
Pest Biocontrol Rate of application 
Yellow stem 
borer Trichogramma japonicum 
BT 
2.00 lakh eggs/ha 
0.75 kg/ha 
Leaf folder 
Trichogramma japonicum 
2.00 lakh eggs/ha 
Hoppers Neem 1500 ppm 
Sheath blight Trichoderma Seed treatment @ 4-5 g/kg 
seed Leaf spot Pseudomonas Seed treatment @ 4-5 g/kg 
seed Brown spot 
Trichogramma japonicum 
2.00 lakh eggs/ha 
Neck blast Nimbecidene + 
Trichogramma japonicum
 500 g /acre + 2.00 lakh 
eggs/ha 
Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Pulses (Green gram and Black gram)  Pulses are a part of the average diet. Yet, pulse production has 
remained in the range of 14 million tonne
s. Pulses are a crop of the marginal 
lands, requiring less water and replenishing soil nutrients. Pulses are less 

concentrated crops. To increase the 
productivity proper plant protection 
measures to control insect pests is essential. Mechanical control methods  Remove and destroy stem fly damaged seedlings 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Pull out plants manifesting symp
toms of sterility mosaic, yellow 
mosaic, leaf curl and leaf crinkle vi
rus disease since they will serve as 
a source of inoculum spread by sucking pests 
 Collect eggs, larvae, pupae and adul
ts of the insects to the extent 
possible to reduce their population 
(leaf feeding caterpillars, beetles, 
weevils, grasshoppers etc.)  Burn the crop residues after harvest. Cultural control methods  Sow good and healthy seeds 
 In stem fly endemic areas use a higher seed rate to the extent of 25 
- 30% to compensate the loss of seedlings 
 Maintain the fields and bunds free from weeds 
 Avoid crops susceptible to some pests either as mixed crops or in 
crop rotation 
 Provide T shaped bird perches 
 Grow castor along the borders to trap 
S.litura, marigold to trap 
H.armigera and cowpea to trap stem fly. 
 The plant density should not exceed 30 - 35 / sq.m. If it exceeds it 
creates favourable microclimate suit
able for the multiplication of 
pests and diseases.  
Botanical control methods  Spray NSKE (5%) or neem oil (3%) alternatively (aphid, mite, 
whitefly) 
Biological control methods 
 Spray specific NPV suspensions of 
H. armigera 
and 
S. litura 
in the 
evening hours 
Behavioural control methods 
 Set up sex pheromone traps to attract and kill male moths of 
Helicoverpa armigera 
and Spodoptera litura. 
Set up five traps per 
acre from floral bud formation and change the septa once in 3 weeks 
 Use of light trap to monitor and kill the attracted adult moths of 
tobacco cut worm.  
Economic Threshold Levels of Major Pests of Pulses 
Pest ETL 
Aphid 20/2.5 cm shoot length 
Pod borer 10% of affected pod 
Spotted pod borer 3/plant 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Stem fly 10% of affected plants 
Tobacco cut worm 8 egg masses/100 m 
 Some of the diseases of pulses are Sterility mosaic disease, 
Alternaria leaf spot, Sterility mosaic 
disease, Macrophomina blight, Yellow 
mosaic virus, Bacterial blight, Cerc
ospora leaf spot, Fusarium wilt, 
Phytophthora stem blight, Ascochyta blight, Powdery mildew. These can be 

controlled by using disease free seeds 
and following proper agro techniques.
 Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Organic Cotton 
Ecosystem 
 Cotton, the most important fibre cr
op of India plays a dominant role 
in its agrarian and industrial economy.
 It is the backbone of our textile 
industry, accounting for 70% of total fi
bre consumption in textile sector, and 
38% of the country's export, fetching over Rs. 42,000 crores. Area under 

cotton cultivation in India (8.9 million 
ha) is the highest in the world, i.e., 
25% of the world area and employs se
ven million people for their living. 
 Cotton productivity in India is 
quite low as compared to world 
standards. The modern cotton production
 technology relies heavily on the use 
of fertilizers and on chemicals to cont
rol insect pests, diseases, weeds and 
growth regulators. Cotton 
cultivated on 5% cultivable land consumes 54% of 
total pesticides used in Indian agricult
ure, and in some pockets, the rates are 
higher than this, leaving immense ecological and human hazards as reported 

by World Health Organization. Use of ch
emicals at such scale causes a lot of 
hazards to man, i.e., environmental po
llution, soil health, and agro-ecology 
and poor profitability in cotton farm
ing. This has basically prompted the 
demand of organically cultivated, eco-friendly or ‚green™ cotton.  
Mechanical control methods  Removal and destruction of crop re
sidues after harvest to avoid the 
carry over population of American
 boll worm to next season.  
 Removal of terminals of cotton crop (topping) at 80-90 days of 
growth to reduce 
Helicoverpa oviposition and also to encourage 
sympodial branching which bears more fruiting bodies. 
 Removal and destruction of alternat
e weed hosts of white fly like 
Abutilon indicum
, Chrozophore rottlari, Solanum nigrum 
and 
Hibiscus 
ficulensus from the fields and neighbouring areas and maintaining 
field sanitation.  Collection and destruction of leaves infested with white fly  
 Hand picking and burning of th
e pink boll worm affected and 
dropped squares, flowers and frui
ts and squashing the pink boll 
worms in the rosettes. Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Removal and destruction of egg masses, early stage larvae found in 
clusters and hand picking and destru
ction of grown up caterpillars to 
minimize heavy build up of future
 population of tobacco cut worm. 
 Uprooting and destroying the weeds like 
Sida 
sp., Abutilon indicum 
and Xanthium 
sp. before sowing of cotton crop to reduce the initial 
build up of boll worm, whitefly and cotton leaf curl virus (CLCV). 
 Rouge the plants infested with CLCV regularly. Cultural control methods  Growing one variety throughout 
the area as far as possible. 
 Deep summer ploughing on bright sunny days during the months of 
May or June should be done to expose soil inhabiting or resting 
stages of insects, pathogens an
d nematode population. The field 
should be kept exposed to sunl
ight for at least 2-3 weeks.  Growing of less preferred crops like green gram, black gram, 
soybean, castor, sorghum etc., alon
g with the cotton as intercrop or 
border crop or alternate crop to reduce the pest infestation. 
 Growing two rows of maize or sorghum or cowpea along the border 
to sustain and enhance the build up of natural enemies such as lady 
bird beetles, staphylinids, 
Chrysoperla carnea, Anthocorids, 
Reduviids etc. Pollen of 
maize helps in retaining 
Chrysoperla in main 
cotton field. 
 Plant trap crops like marigold or okra or pigeon pea along the 
border and irrigation bunds to dive
rt American boll worm oviposition 
from main cotton crop. 
 Growing castor along the border an
d irrigation bunds as trap crop 
for tobacco cut worm, okra for 
spotted boll worm and aphid. 
 Use neem cake @ 1 t / ha under assured moisture conditions in 
nematode infested fields. 
 Earthing up on 45
th 
day (stem weevil). 
 Basal application of FYM 25 t/ha and 250 kg/ha of neem cake (stem 
weevil).  Install 15-20 bird perches per acre for the benefit of predatory birds 
like black drango, king crow, orange myna etc. after 90 days of crop 
growth. Provide drinking pots with
 water to them by placing them 
around the perches.  
Biological control methods 
 Application of 
Helicoverpa armigera 
or Spodoptera litura 
nuclear 
polyhedrosis virus (NPV) @ 250-500 LE / ha (1 LE = 6x10
9 POBs) (1 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 LE / litre of water) depending up
on the crop growth with jaggery 
and teepol in evening hours at 7
th 
and 12th week after sowing.  ULV spray of NPV at 3 x 10 
12 POB /ha with 10% cotton seed kernel 
extract, 10% crude sugar, 0.1% 
each of Tinopal and Teepol for 
effective control of H.armigera
.  Inundative release of egg parasitoid, 
Trichogramma spp., at 6.25 
cc/ha at 15 days interval 3 times from 45 DAS (American boll worm) 
 Inundative release of egg-larval parasitoid, 
Chelonus blackburnii 
and 
predator, Chrysoperla carnea at 100000 / ha at 6
th, 13th and 14
th 
weeks after sowing (American boll worm) 
 Seed treatment with 
Trichoderma 
spp. @ 4g / kg of seed for seed 
borne diseases  Botanical control methods 
 Spray NSKE 5% or neem oil (5 ml/l) or fish oil resin soap 25 kg / ha 
@ 1 kg in 40 l of water or 5 % notchi leaf extract or 5% 
Catharanthus rosea 
extract (whitefly)  Spray NSKE 5% or neem oil formulation 0.5% or neem oil 3% thrice 
at fortnightly intervals (sucking pests) 
 Spray NSKE 5% as a strong oviposition deterrent (American boll 
worm) 
 Spray fish oil resin soap 25 kg / ha @1 kg in 40 l of water (mealy 
bug) Behavioural control methods 
 Use pheromone traps for monitoring
 American boll worm, pink boll 
worm, spotted boll worm and toba
cco cut worm. Install pheromone 
traps at a distance of 50 m @ 5 traps per acre for each insect pest. 

Use specific lures for each insect species and change it after every 

15-20 days. Trapped moths should be removed daily. If the number 

of trapped adult moths is 10 (American boll worm), 20 (tobacco cut 

worm), 15 (spotted boll worm) and 
8 (pink boll worm) necessary 
action should be taken. 
 Installing light traps with incandescent lamp (1-2 / acre) for 
monitoring of insect activity (A
merican boll worm and tobacco cut 
worm). The crop around the light 
trap may be sprayed with neem 
oil. 
 Monitoring the activities of the ad
ult white flies by setting up yellow 
pan traps and sticky traps at 1 foot height above the plant canopy. 
Locally available empty yellow palmol
ine tins coated with grease / 
Vaseline / castor oil on outer surface may also be used.  
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Paint yellow colour on plastic drinking water pot, apply castor oil on 
it and move it on both sides with
 hand by walking in the field to 
attract and trap whiteflies.  
Note: 
1. Use only incandescent light in light traps, as mercury lamp attracts 
natural enemies in large numbers.   
          2. The light trap should be lighted between 8 - 10 pm. 

Economic Threshold Levels (ETLs) of Major Pests of Cotton 
Insect Pest Economic Threshold Level 
American boll worm One egg or one larva /plant 
Spotted boll worm 10% infested shoots / squares / bolls 
Spiny boll worm 10% infested shoots / squares / bolls 
Pink boll worm 10% infested fruiting parts 
Tobacco cut worm 8 egg masses/100 m row 
Leafhopper  50 nymphs or adults/50 leaves 
Whitefly 5-10 nymphs and adults / leaf 
Aphid 15% of infested plant 
Thrips 50 nymphs or adults/50 leaves 
Stem weevil 10% infestation 
Mite 10 mites/cm
2 leaf area 
Cotton Mealy bug - Recent Threat to cotton cultivation 
Eco-friendly way 
 Raise cowpea as a bund/border crop to encourage the activities of 
Natural enemies 
 Monitor the crop regularly at least once in a week.  
 Look for the ant activity / shiny 
leaves / yellowing , presence of 
sooty mould (advanced stages) 
 Look for the predatory coccinellids, 
Chrysoperla 
and encourage their activities and avoid using syntheti
c insecticides when the natural 
enemy activities are more.  Microbial Bioagents like 
Beauveria
 and
 Verticillium
 are found to be 
effective but takes some time to 
control the nymphs and adults, but 
this method is ecofriendly and sustainable.   
 Crawlers (Early stage mealybug nymphs) can be controlled by 
spraying neem oil 2% or fish oil rosin soap 25g/l of water (to get 
effective control, thorough
 coverage is essential). 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Diseases of Cotton and their management Disease and cause Control measures Seedling disease
 Rhizoctonia, Fusarium and Pythium 
spp Plant only high quality seed. Plant in 
warm, well-drained soil. Avoid crop 

stress due to a lack of fertilizer, 

excess water or excess herbicides. 

Plant on raised beds 
Boll rots
 Prolonged periods of high humidity or 

water on the boll surface are 

necessary for infection. Rank growth 

promotes boll rot. Avoid practices 

that result in a rank dense canopy. 
Bacterial diseases Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
malvacearum Most varieties have some resistance.  
Crop rotation will control this 

problem. Leaf spot 
Alternaria macrospora 
Cercospora gossypina 
Ascochyta gossypii These leaf spot diseases are of minor 

importance and specific controls are 

not recommended.  

They appear more frequently on 

stressed plants. 
Fusarium wilt Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
vasinfectum 
Most varieties are somewhat 

resistant. Maintain soil pH at 6.0 to 

6.5, and use sufficient nutrients for 

plant growth. Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Organic Vegetable Ecosystem 
 Vegetables being a rich and cheap source of vitamins and minerals, 
occupy an important place in the food
 basket of Indian consumers. The 
country is producing about 98 million tonnes (MT) of vegetables from an area 

of around 6.07 million ha. Not withstanding the advantages of vegetables, 

farmers confront a number of problems pa
rticularly of insect pests, diseases, 
nematodes and mites which limit their 
production. Among the vegetable crops 
okra, brinjal, tomato, cabbage and ca
uliflower are important and together 
occupy an area of 1.65 m ha with an annual production of 22.17 MT and they 

are infested by several pests at various stages resulting in a yield loss of 
about 25-30%. Pest management is thus
 important with a view to reduce 
undesired use of pesticides.
 Integrated Pest/Disease Management package for Organic Tomato 
Ecosystem 
Mechanical control methods  Collection and destruction of da
maged fruits, early instar and 
grownup caterpillars of Helicoverpa armigera 
and Spodoptera litura.  
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Collection and destruction of virus affected plants. 
Cultural control methods  Grow simultaneously 45 days old Am
erican tall marigold and 25 days 
old tomato seedlings @ 1:16 rows
 so that both will come to 
flowering at the same time and 
Helicoverpa armigera 
adults will be 
attracted to marigold for oviposition. 
 Grow 50 castor plants / acre as 
a trap crop for tobacco cut worm 
and the egg masses and early instar larvae in clusters on castor crop 
should be periodically collected and destroyed. 
 Remove alternate weed host of whitefly, Abutilon indicum.  Apply press mud @ 5 kg/m2 for nematode disease complex. 
 Installation of T shaped bird perches @ 15-20 / ha. 
 Deep summer ploughing (tobacco
 cut worm and nematode).  
 Flood irrigation to bring out the hi
ding larvae (tobacco cut worm). 
 Grow sorghum or bajra as border crop (sucking pests and viral 
diseases transmitted by them) 
 Ploughing the nursery area, uniform
ly spreading paddy husk @ 20 
kg / m
2 (about 15 cm thickness) bu
rning it and ploughing back 
facilitates production of nematode free seedlings. 
 In nursery apply 200 g of neem cake / sq m (nematode). 
 Crop rotation with marigold, ging
elly, mustard, maize, wheat etc. 
(nematode). Biological control methods 
 Spray Bacillus thuringiensis @ 2g/l. (H. armigera 
and S. litura). 
 Release Trichogramma chilonis 
@ 50000/ha/ week (up to 6 weeks) 
coinciding with flowering time and based on ETL (
H. armigera 
and S. 
litura). 
 Application of NPV: For 
H. armigera: H.a.NPV 250 LE / acre 
 For S. litura
: S.l
. NPV 250LE / acre along with 1 kg jaggery and 100 
ml teepol at 10 days interval. 
 Treat the seeds with antagonistic fungi, 
Trichoderma viride 
@ 4 g/kg 
seed (nematode) Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Botanical control methods 
 Spray Neem Seed Kernel Extract 50 g/l (serpentine leaf miner). 
 Spray fish oil rosin soap 25 g/l.
 Add wetting agent (whitefly). Behavioural control methods 
 Set up pheromone traps @ 12/ha (
H. armigera 
and S. litura
). When 
the trapped moths are 8 / day necessary action may be taken. 
 Install yellow sticky traps to attract the adult
 whiteflies. Major Insect Pests of Tomatoes Name Damage
 Control Aphid Sucks sap; Vectors 
disease; Creates 

honeydew which 

attracts sooty mold; 

Misshapen foliage, 

flowers, and fruit Insecticidal soap; 
Beneficial insects 

(ladybugs, lacewings, 

etc.); 
Beauvaria 
bassiana; Pyrethrum; 
Rotenone 
Armyworm Feeds on foliage and 
fruit Beneficial insects; Bt on 
larvae; Superior oil 
Blister beetle Feeds on foliage and 
fruit Larvae are beneficial. 
For severe infestations, 

use pyrethrum, 

rotenone, or sabadilla 
Colorado potato beetle Feeds on foliage Bt on larvae; Encourage 
beneficials; Neem; 
Pyrethrum; Rotenone 
Cutworm Cuts plant stem Apply parasitic 
nematodes to soil; 

Wood ashes around 

stem; Moist bran mixed 

with Bt scattered on soil 
Flea beetle Many small holes in 
foliage Row covers; Sanitation; 
Apply parasitic 

nematodes to soil; 

Neem; Pyrethrum; 

Rotenone; Sabadilla 
Fruitworm Feeds on foliage, 
flower, fruit Destroy infested fruit; 
Bt; Row covers; Neem; 

Ryania Hornworm Feeds on foliage and 
fruit Bt; Pyrethrum if severe 
Pinworm Fruit has narrow black 
tunnels 
Destroy infested fruit; 
Till at season end to 

prevent over wintering Stink bug Deformed fruit with Control weeds near 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 whitish-yellow spots plants; Trap crops; 
Planting late-maturing 

varieties; Attract 

beneficials by planting 

small-flowered plants; 

Sabadilla Whitefly Distorted, yellow 
leaves; Honeydew which attracts sooty 
mold 
Insecticidal soap; 
Yellow sticky traps; 
Beneficial insects; Garlic 
oil; Pyrethrum; 

Rotenone; 
Beauveria bassiana Tomato Diseases and their management 
 Tomato diseases are rarely fatal, if the proper management is 
employed. It is important to catch any to
mato disease early, before it spreads 
to all of tomato plants and possibly othe
r plants in the same family, such as 
potatoes, eggplants and peppers. Here
 are some common tomato diseases 
and their management.  
Early Blight
: Early Blight fungus overwinters in plant residue and is soil-
borne. It can also come in on transplants. Remove affected plants and 
thoroughly clean fall garden debris. Wet 
weather and stressed plants increase 
likelihood of attack. Copper sprays ca
n prevent further development of the 
fungus.  
Gray Leaf Spot: 
Gray Leaf Spot affects only th
e leaves of tomatoes, starting 
with the oldest leaves. Warm, moist 
conditions worsen gray leaf spot 
problems. Remove all affected plants and fall garden debris. Selection of 
resistant varieties prevents the disease infection. 
Late Blight:
 Late blight affects both the leaves and fruit of tomatoes. Late 
Blight is the disease responsible for the Irish Potato Famine. The Late Blight 
fungus can overwinter in frost free areas. Cool, wet weather encourages the 
development of the fungus. 
Septoria Leaf Spot:
 Septoria Leaf Spot is sometimes mistaken for Late 
Blight. With septoria leaf spot, the pape
ry patches on the leaves develop tiny, 
dark specks inside them. Older leaves are affected first. Copper sprays are 
somewhat affective at halting the spread of symptoms.  
Verticillium Wilt:
 This name can be misleading, as sometimes the leaves 
will turn yellow, dry up and never appear to wilt. Verticillium wilt is caused by 
a soil-borne fungus and it can affect many different vegetables. The fungus 
can persist in the soil for many years,
 so crop rotation and selection of 
resistant varieties is crucial. Remove affected plants and choose resistant 
varieties.  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Organic Brinjal 
Ecosystem 
Mechanical control methods  Collection and destruction of th
e beetles, grubs and pupae of 
Epilachna beetle. 
 Removal and destruction of dried and withered shoots of shoot and 
fruit borer to arrest the spread of the pest.   Remove the affected fruits and de
stroy (shoot and fruit borer).  
 Remove the little leaf affected plants. 
 Collection and destruction of aphid infested twigs. 
 Removal and destruction of webbed leaves (leaf webber). 
Cultural control methods  Application of press mud at 5 kg/m
2 at the time of sowing. 
 Application of 200 kg neem cake / acre as basal (shoot and fruit 
borer, nematode and ash weevil). 
 Maintain the correct spacing (shoot and fruit borer). 
 In nursery apply 200 g of neem cake / sq m (nematode). 
 Crop rotation with marigold, ging
elly, mustard, maize, wheat etc. 
(nematode).  Deep summer ploughing (nematode).  
 Transplant healthy seedlings. 
 Avoid rationing of brinjal crop since woody stem is preferred by stem 
borer larvae. Botanical control methods 
 Spray neem oil 3% plus teepol (1 ml/l) or spray neem seed kernel 
extract 5 % (whitefly, Epilachna beetle, aphid). 
 Spray neem seed kernel extract 5 % or neem oil 3% starting from 
one month after planting at 15 days 
interval (shoot and fruit borer).  
 Pour 4% NSKE to soak the severely
 affected plant™s root system by 
making 2-3 inch holes (ash weevil). 
 Biological control methods 
 Seed treatment with antagonistic fungi 
viz. Trichoderma harzianum
 or T. viride @ 
4 g/kg seed (nematode).  Apply Pseudomonas fluorescens@
 10 g / m2 for nematodes. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Release 1st 
instar larvae of green lace wing, 
Chrysoperla carnea @ 
10,000 per ha (aphid). 
Behavioural control methods 
 Monitor the whitefly with yellow sticky trap @ 12/ha. 
 Installation of pheromone traps (shoot and fruit borer).
 Diseases of Brinjal and their management 
Alternaria Leaf Spot: 
Alternaria melongenae, A. solani  
Bacterial Wilt: 
Pseudomonas solanacearum  
Cercospora Leaf Spot: Cercospora solani -melongenae, C. solani  
Collar Rot: Sclerotium rolfsii 
 Management  Pant samrat variety is tolerant.  
 Crop rotation with cruciferous vegeta
bles such as cauliflower help in 
reducing the disease incidence.  
 Fields should be kept clean and effected parts are to be collected 
and burnt.  
 The diseases are more prevalent in the presence of root knot 
Nematodes, so control of these ne
matodes will suppress the disease 
spread.   Seed treatment with 4 g of 
Trichoderma viride formulation per kg 
seed will help in reducing the diseases.  
 Collection and destruction of dise
ased parts and portions of the 
plant.   Spray Copper fungicides to control the diseases  Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Organic Bhendi Ecosystem 
Mechanical control methods  Collection and destruction of 
damaged buds and flowers and 
distorted fruits (fruit borer). Cultural control methods  Application of neem cake 400 kg/ha at sowing (nematode). 
Botanical control methods 
 Spray Neem Seed Kernel Extract 5 % 
or neem oil (3%) (fruit borer, 
leafhopper, mites and whitefly). 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Biological control methods 
 Release of egg parasite, Trichogramma @ 1.0 lakh/ha (fruit borer). 
 Release of 1
st instar larvae of green lace wing bug, 
Chrysoperla carnea @ 10,000/ha (fruit borer). 
 Spray Bacillus thuringiensis 2 g/l (fruit borer). 
Behavioural control methods 
 Set up pheromone trap at 12/ha (fruit borer) 
 Installation of yellow sticky traps to trap whitefly adults. 
Diseases of bhendi and their management 

Cercospora Leaf Spots: Cercospora malayensis
 C. abelmoschi Fusarium Wilt Of Okra: Fusarium vasinfectum 
Powdery Mildew: Erysiphe cichoracearum and  
Vein-Clearing/Yellow Vein Mosaic  
Management  Once the disease becomes destructive,
 it is advisable to find clean 
fields even if such a plan involves renting additional land.  
 A better plan is to use a 6-year rotation before the fungus is 
destructive; this permit many ye
ars of okra growing without too 
much loss.   For sowing during the summer season
, when the whitefly activity is 
high, the susceptible varieties should be avoided.  
 By selecting varieties resistant to 
yellow vein mosaic like Parbhani 
Kranti, Arka Abhay, Arka Anamika, Co3, and Varsha Uphar, the 
incidence of the disease can be minimised.  
 Even in these varieties, when a pl
ant starts exhibiting symptom of 
the disease, it should be pulled 
out immediately and burnt by which 
the spread of the diseases can be prevented.  
Integrated Pest/Disease Management Package for Organic Chilli 
Ecosystem 
Mechanical control methods  Collection and destruction of damaged fruits and grownup 
caterpillars (fruit borers).  Collection and destruction of the dropped flowers and fruits (midge). 
 Collection and destruction of virus affected plants. 
Cultural control methods Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Raise 2 rows of maize or sorghum for every 5 rows of chilli crop 
against wind direction (chilli mosaic). 
 Crop rotation with maize, soybea
n, green gram, black gram etc. (
H. 
armigera and S. litura
). 
 Deep summer ploughing (
H. armigera, S. litura 
and root worm). 
 Raise 2-3 rows of maize or sorghum as border crop to prevent the 
attack of 
H. armigera 
and S. litura 
from surrounding fields and 
enhances the activity of lady bird beetle. 
 Plant the trap crops for 
H. armigera
 (marigold)
 and  S. litura 
(castor) 
@100 plants / acre and periodical destruction of egg masses and 
larvae found on trap crops. 
 Provision of bird perches @ 15-20 / ha and also provide water pots 
around them. 
 Application of well composted farm yard manure along with neem 
cake (root worm) 
 Don™t crop the chilli in the fields
 where tomato and brinjal were 
raised previously.  Intercrop onion 1 line after 10-12 
lines of chilli to enhance the 
natural enemy population especi
ally, coccinellids and syrphids. 
Botanical control methods 
 Spray neem oil and NSKE (mite, 
thrips, fruit borers, whitefly). 
 If the infestation is severe, spray th
e botanicals at weekly intervals. 
Biological control methods 
 Spray Bacillus thuringiensis at 2 g/l (fruit borers). 
 Apply TNAU formulation of VAM (con
taining 1 spore/g to control root 
knot nematode in nursery). 
 When H. armigera 
is in egg stage, release 
Trichogramma 
@ 60000 / acre two to three times. 
 Spray H.a NPV and S.l 
NPV @ 200 LE / ha + 500 g jaggery + 100 ml 
teepol in evening hours. Behavioural control methods 
 Set up pheromone traps for 
Helicoverpa armigera and Spodoptera 
litura at 12 /ha. 
 Installation of yellow 
sticky traps (whitefly). Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Diseases of chillies and their management 
Disease Stage Important
Factors favouring infection 
Management Damping off  Seedling (nursery)  
Moist soils 
poordrainage 90-

100% R.H soil 

temperature 20
°C Partial sterilization of soil 
by burning trash in the 

surface helps in checking 

the disease 

Follow cultural practices 

such as thin planting 

(600 - 750g seed per 

cent) on raised seedbeds.  
Use of light textured soils 

provides better drainage 

and aeration.  

Use of well decomposed 

manure.  

Seed treatment with 4g 
Trichoderma viride formulation  
Anthrac-
nose /Die 

back /Fruit 

rot  Fruiting  Infected seed 
airborne wind - 

blown rains Use disease free seed. Seed - borne infection is 

controlled by seed 

treatment  
 Frog eye 

leaf spot  Nursery  Prolonged period of 
wetness  
Seed and infected 
crop residues Crop rotation 
Use of resistant varieties Powdery 

mildew  
Any stage 
of growth 

in main 

field  Warm climate both 
dry and humid  

More leaf shedding 

at low humidity Crop rotation 
Use of resistant varieties Fusarium wilt  
Nursery & mainfield  High temperatures  
Wet soil conditions 
Use of wilt resistant 
varieties Bacterial leaf spot  Main field 
all stages 
of crop  
Cloudy weather The bacteria are seed - 
borne and the seeds can 

be treated with corrosive 

sublimate. It is also soil-

borne and hence crop 

rotation is essential 
Leaf curl  Main field 
all stage of 
crop  Virus generally 
transmitted by 
white-fly  Crop rotation 
Use of resistant varieties Mosaic 

Viruses  Main field 
at all 
Virus transmitted by insect vectors.  
Crop rotation 
Use of resistant varieties Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 stages of 
crop  (Sucking pest)  
 Eco-Friendly Methods for Stored Grain/Seed Insect Management 
 Ever since the advent of stabilized Agriculture, storage of produce 
has remained an issue of utmost concern. Unless the problem of storage is 

solved satisfactorily the problem of hung
ry millions may continue even with 
substantial increase in production. Th
ere are a number of estimates of post 
harvest losses. Most conservative estima
tes for the post harvest losses in food 
grains in India even put at about 10%, 
a quantity good enough to feed at 
least 60 million people. Out of the tota
l production, about 70% is retained 
and stored by farmers for consumption,
 as seed, feed and payment of wages 
and only about 30% is marketable su
rplus. Insects are responsible for 
enormous spoilage in storage they feed 
on grain, bore the kernel, and destroy 
the germ portion, cause heating and dete
rioration in stored produce. As per 
the Pause committee report, the storage losses due to insect pests of stored 

grain are 2.55%. In addition they are 
also responsible for the qualitative 
losses in food grains.  
Sources of Infection 
 Field infestation, insects fly from st
ores to fields and lay eggs upon 
the maturing grains.   These eggs hatch out to larvae in favourable conditions when grains 
reach the stores. They can crawl/fly to fresh stocks and infest them 
is called cross infestation.  
 It has been a general practices, sp
ecially with farmers, that they 
keep without cleaning the empty food grain bags for use in the next 
season only.  
 Eggs and larvae of insects rema
in hidden and feed on the grain 
fragments in the off season. Whenever the grains are filled up in 
such bags, infestation reappears.  
 The insects, which may be present 
in the joints or corners of the 
carriers, migrate to the food grai
n lots and cause infestation.  
 The scientific storage of grains helps in minimizing the damage by 
insects, and microorganisms.  
 The following methods can help in safe storage of grains. 
 Preventive measures  
 Curative measures  
Preventive measures Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Cleaning the storage structures, sealing of cracks, crevices and holes 
present in the floors. Cleaning of the Sheller before their use.  
 Storage structures/godowns/gunny bags should be disinfected with 
approved residual insecticides pr
eferably with Malathion 50% EC, 
with dilution 1 : 100.  
 Proper stacking of the filled bags
 for proper hygiene and sanitation 
prevents insect damage in the godowns.  
Curative measures  
The infestation of stored grain insect
 pests can be minimized by different 
methods Physical control measures 
 Heat treatment of stored grain at 55-60°C  
 Mixing of inert dusts with grain ma
kes entry of insects a difficult 
task. However here grain has to be washed before consumption.  
Mechanical measures  These measures are practicable and include sieving of grains.  
Ecological measures 
 Temperature, moisture content of 
grain and availability of oxygen 
have to be suitably manipulated by designing and constructing the 
storage structures which create unfavourable ecological conditions 

for insect attack.   Food grains kept in airtight sealed structure remain insect free. Eg. 
Pusa bin.  
 Grains with moisture content less than 10% are not suitable for 
multiplication and survival of mo
st of the insects (except Khapra 
beetle which can survive but it is susceptible to reduced oxygen 

content)  
 Apart from this TNAU have developed various ecofriendly techniques 
for controlling stored products and are given below. 
i. TNAU Insect Probe Trap 
 
 The use of trap is relatively a new method of 
detecting trapping insects in stored grains. The basic 

component of a TNAU probe trap consists of three 
important parts: A main tube, 
insect trapping tube and a 
detachable cone at the bottom. Equispaced perforations of 

2 mm diameter are made in the main tube. 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Concept 
 Insects love ﬁAIRﬂ and move towards air. This behaviour of the 
insect is exploited in this technology. 
 Method of working 
 The insect trap has to be kept in the grain like rice, wheat etc., 
vertically with the white plastic cone 
downside as shown the figure. The top 
red cap must be with the level of the gr
ain. Insects will move towards air in 
the main tube and enter through the hole
. Once the insect enters the hole it 
falls down into the detachable white co
ne at the bottom. Then there is no 
way to escape and the insects are tr
apped forever. The white detachable 
cone can be unscrewed once in a week
 and the insects can be destroyed. 
Salient Features 
 No chemicals; No side effects and No maintenance cost. 
Significance 
 Commercialized during 2002. Around
 1, 00,000 units have been sold 
so far across the country. The trap has been included for 
popularization under Canadian International Development Agency 

(CIDA) and Mc Gill University Project on "
Food Security in South 
India" 
at TNAU, Coimbatore and UAS 
(University of Agricultural 
Sciences), Dharwad during 2003-2007.  
 CARE (Co-operative for Assist
ance and Belief Everywhere) 
world's largest independent, non profit, nonsectarian, non 
government international relief an
d development organization with 
its internal secretariat at Brussels, Belgium is using the TNAU probe 

trap technology under integrated child development services in 

Madhya Pradesh. 
 Won Best Creative product award from Chamber of Commerce, 
South India, 2002. 
Recent achievements 
 A good response from tribal region
s of Adilabad district of Andhra 
Pradesh for the trap. Women are purchasing the trap and using 
them to control insects in rice / 
sorghum. They say that the traps are 
useful in reducing the drudgery of cleaning their grains through 

frequent sieving. 
 Recently M/s. TATA Chemicals Ltd., Kolkatta has taken up marketing 
of TNAU probe trap, through TATA Kissan Sanchar in Gorakpur area 

of Uttar Pradesh after detailed field studies independently by them. 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Efficiency 
 TNAU Insect traps are excellent insect detection devices in food 
grains and more effective in the detection of stored grain insects namely 
Rhyzopertha dominica 
(F.), 
Sitophilus cryzae 
(L.) and 
Tribolium castaneum 
(Herbst) in stored food grains both 
in terms of detection 
as well as 
number of insects caught 
than the standard normal sampling method (by 
spear sampling). The detection ratio (trap 
: normal sample) is higher in trap 
than of normal sampling method by fa
ctors ranging from 2 : 1 to 31:1. The 
insects catch is also higher in the 
probe trap than the normal sampling 
method by factors ranging from 20: 1 to 121: 1. 
 They are also good mass trapping devices when used at 2 - 3 
numbers / 25 kg bin (28 cm dia and 39 cm length). They should be placed at 

top 6 inches of the grain, where the insect
 activity is seen during early period 
of storage. They can remove > 80% 
of the insects within 10 - 20 days. 
ii. TNAU Pit Fall Trap
 Pitfall traps are used for capturing insects active on grain surface and in other 
layers of grain (Monitorin
g and mass trapping tool). Standard Model
  Standard model of pitfall trap has 2 
parts, perforated lid (2 mm (or) 3 
mm) and a cone shaped bottom 

portion.  Application of special coating with 
sticky material on the inner side of 
cone to hold trapped insects is 
necessary 
 This procedure is tedious. 
TNAU Model
  TNAU model has perforated lid, cone 
shaped bottom which tapers into a 
funnel shaped trapping tube. 
 Hence sticky coating is dispensed 
with  Commercial model is in plastic, 
simple and economical. 
 Easy to handle. 
Significance
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Commercialized very recently 
and product launched on 18 
September 2006 by TNAU and available in food grade plastic 
materials.  Cost is only Rs.25/-  Around 1000 units have been distribu
ted to KVK's for popularization 
of the technology  Because of easy handling and low cost, there is great scope of this 
model to spread fast across the country.  No such cost effective and durable 
device is available so far in any 
part of the world. Twenty five Rupees investment will be worth to 
collect plenty of stored grain insects. iii. TNAU Two-In-One Model Trap 
The probe trap containing the components namely the 
perforated tube, pitfall me
chanism, a collection tube 
and the cone shaped pitfall trap with a perforated lid 

and the bottom tapering cone were combined as a 

single unit. Combination of probe and pitfall increase 

the trapping efficiency of insects. Best suited for pulse 

beetles as they are seen only on grain surface 

wandering here and there. It does not require tedious 

procedures like coating the inner surface of pitfall cone 

with sticky materials before trapping to hold pulse 

beetles. Beetles are captured alive in this trap, which 

may facilitate release of pheromone and there by 
attract more insects. Significance
  Commercialised and commercial launc
hing was held on 30.12.2003. 
 Around 100-200 used of farmers of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka units 
have been dispatched to UAS, Dharwad for popularisation 
 This trap technology is one of the promising technologies 
commercialised under National Ag
ricultural Technology Project 
funded by World Bank (Rainfed eco 

system)  Spreading fast across the country. 
iv. Indicator Device 
It consists of a cone shaped perforated cup 
(3mm perforation) with a lid at the top. The cup 

is fixed at the bottom with a container and 

circular dish, which are to be smeared with 

sticky material like vaseline.  Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Farmers, before storing their puls
es, should take 200 g of pulses to 
be stored and put them in the cup. Wh
en the field carried over beetles start 
emerging, due to their wandering behavi
our, they enter the perforations and 
get slipped off and fall into the trappi
ng portions. As they stick on to the 
sticky materials, farmers can easily lo
cate the beetles and can take out the 
bulk-stored pulses for sun drying.  The 
device with 2mm perforations can be 
used for cereals. This will help in elim
inating the initial po
pulation, which acts 
as the major source for further build up
. Thus, timely detection will help the 
farmers to preserve their valuable pulses during storage. The device is being 

popularised. v. TNAU Automatic Insect Removal Bin 
 TNAU insect removal bin can remove insect 
automatically. The structure has 4 major parts 

namely outer container, inner perforated container, 

collection vessel and the lid. The model exploits 

wandering behaviour of stored product insects as 

well as the movement of these insects towards well 

aerated regions. The grains are held in the specially 

designed inner perforated container. The space 

between inner and outer container provides good 

aeration for the insects. Insects, while wandering, 

enter the perforation to reach the aerated part and while doing so, get slipped 

off and fall into the collection vessel th
rough a pitfall mechanism provided in 
the collection vessel. In order to quickly 
collect the insects, as and when they 
emerge from grains, perforated (2 mm) rods are fixed in the inner container. 
 The container will be useful for st
oring rice, wheat, broken pulses, 
coriander etc. The insects such as rice
 weevil, lesser grain borer, red flour 
beetle, saw toothed beetle, which are commonly found attacking stored 

grains can be removed automatically by storing grains in this container. 

Within a very short period of 10 days a majority of the insects (more than 90 

per cent) can be removed from the grains. The containers are available in 2 

kg, 5 kg, 25 kg, 100 kg and 500 kg capacities. 
Efficiency 
 Grains (paddy and sorghum) stored in Automatic insect removal bin 
(100 kg and 500 kg) recorded only 1 - 4% damage by insects compared to 33 

to 65% damage in ordinary bin after 10 
months of storage. The population of 
insects (R. dominica,  S. oryzae) 
ranged from 0 - 2/kg in grain stored in 100 
kg Automatic insect removal bin compared to 5 - 191 / kg in ordinary bin after 10 months of storage. 
Significance 
 The technology was popularised of the Avinashilingam deemed 
University through a project from Department Science and 
Technology, Government of India. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Tamil Nadu State Council for Scie
nce and Technology sanction Rs. 
10,000 during 1998 for popularisation
 of Gadgets to women folk. 
 Suitability for developing countries
  No granaries can be filled with grains 
without insects
 as the 
harvested produce contain, egg (or) la
rvae (or) pupae in them because of 
'field carryover infestation' which canno
t be avoided in developing countries 
like India (known scientific fact). 
 So the aim of stored product insect researcher should target on this 
field carryover population (which is ge
nerally < 1%) which emerge has adults 
15 to 20 days after harvest in granaries. 
 In this field carryover population 
is not cared then the insect will 
multiply and contaminate the food grai
ns and complete damage can even be 
expected within 4 months of storage. 
 Here comes the role of 
automatic insect removal bin
 which can 
remove substantial number of emerging adults and sometimes free living 

larvae also.  Significant achievements have happe
ned in popularization of Automatic 
Insect Removal bin Technology. 
vi. UV - Light Trap for Grain Storage Godowns 
The UV light trap mainly consists of 
a ultra-violet source (4 W germicidal 

lamps). The lamp produces ultra-

violet rays of peak emission around 

250 nano meter. The light is fitted at 

the centre of a funnel of 310 mm 

diameter at the top and 35 mm 

diameter at the bottom. The bottom 

end of the funnel is attached with a 

transparent plastic container for 

collecting the trapped insects. To 

hang the unit at desired points, 
three hooks have been provided at the pe
riphery of the funnel. The unit is also 
provided with a tripod stand.  The UV light trap can be placed in food grain storage godowns at 1.5 
m above ground level, preferably in pl
aces around warehouse corners, as it 
has been observed that the insect tend
s to move towards these places during 
the evening hours. The trap can be operated during the night hours. The light 

trap attracts stored product insects of paddy like lesser grain borer, 
Rhyzopertha dominica, red flour beetle, 
Tribolium castaneum and saw 
toothed beetle, 
Oryzaephilus surnamensis 
in large numbers. Psocids which are 
of great nuisance in godowns are also 
attracted in large numbers. Normally 2 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 numbers of UV light trap per 60 x 20 m (L x B) godown with 5 m height is 
suggested.  The trap is ideal for use in godowns meant for long term storage of 
grains, whenever infested stocks a
rrive in godowns and during post 
fumigation periods to trap the resistant 
strains and left over insects to prevent 
build up of the pest populations. In go
downs of frequent transactions the trap 
can be used for monitoring. 
Efficiency 
 It has been found that two traps kept at the corners of the 
warehouse (60m x 20m x 5m) can catch around 200 insects/day even from a 

godown where normal sampling did no
t show any insect presence, thus 
indicating its effectiveness as a monito
ring and mass trapping device. It has 
been recorded around 3000 
Rhyzopertha dominica 
on a single day from single 
trap kept in a paddy godown. 
Significance 
National  The Food Co-operation of India ha
s entered into MOU with TNAU for 
popularisation of this trap. Already 
25 officers of all has been trained 
on this line.  M/s. Bannari Amman sugars Limited uses the UV light trap 
technology under the consultancy project with TNAU for 

management of stored grain insects in their godowns. 
International 
  M/s. Madaus Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd Goa, 
(German Firm) has adopted the UV trap 
technology to detect/mass trap cigarette 

beetle infestation in their export produce, 

senna pods/seeds (
Casia augustifolia
).  
 M/s. Saraf Trading Corporation Pvt. Ltd., 
Cochin which exports herbal tea to Europe 
uses the UV- light trap technology for 

detection/mass trapping of 
Lasioderma 
serricorne.  In Ayurvedic and Siddha Medicine factories 
UV-light trap will be used for detection of 
insects in the plant product ingredients 

used for medicines. 
vii. TNAU Stored Grain Insect Management Kit 
 Food grains are stored for varying periods to ensure proper and 
balanced public distribution througho
ut the year.  Among the biotic and 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 abiotic factors which affect grains / seeds in storage, insect plays a major role 
in the deterioration of grains / seeds ca
using both qualitativ
e and quantitative 
losses.  Often the presence of insects in
 store houses are felt only when they 
are hovering and flying around, by which time enormous loss and population 

build up of insects might have occurred.  Hence, timely detection of the 

stored grain insects will help to prevent heavy losses. 
TNAU is one of the pioneering institutes in India in the development of detection devices 
for stored grain insects.  These devices exploit the wandering behaviour of the insects 

and help in timely detection of insects in stored produce leading to timely control.  These 

include TNAU probe trap, TNAU pit fall trap
, two in one model trap, indicator device, 
Automatic insect removal bin and UV-light trap technology.  These devices have been 

widely used in many places and have received State and National recognitions. 
 Hence, the Department of Agricult
ural Entomology, Centre for Plant 
Protection Studies, TNAU, Coimbatore has developed a ﬁKITﬂ named as 

TNAU-Stored Grain Insect Pest Management Kit
 containing prototypes 
of all the devices along with a CD-R
om about the devices and how to use 
them.  This kit will be of great use in 
popularization of the technologies across 
the country.   The kit will be an ideal ﬁh
ands - on trainingﬂ tool for Education, 
Extension centers (KVK, Plant clinic, save
 grain centers) and also for private 
ware housing.  This TNAU kit is the 
first of its kind in the world.   
Significance
  The kit has been commercially launched by TNAU through MOU with 
M/s. KSNM Marketing, Coimbatore. 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Good response from Agrl. Colleges, KVK's, PHT's Centers across the 
country. So far around one hundred units have been sold by the 
firm.  For the benefit of the students and staff of Agricultural College 
and Home Science Colleges of our country the entire information 

on above kit is hosted the website under TNAU-Mc-Gill CIDA 
Project.  
     www.agrenv.mcgill.ca/agreng/india/files/pest%20trap
  ICAR - Agricultural Engineering Regional Center (ICAE) at 
Coimbatore has taken up TOT of this technology and spreading this 
technology through Income generation project. 
viii. A Device to Remove Insect Eggs from Stored Pulse Seeds 
(Patent No. 198434) 
 Pulses are more difficult to 
store than cereals as these suffer a 

great damage during storage by 

pulse beetle Callosobruchus
 sp. The 
main source of infestation by pulse 

beetle is it™s carry over damage from 

field to stores which is well known.  

The present invention is a prototype 

of a gadget which can successfully 

crush the eggs of pulse beetle, 
Callosobruchus chinensis
 and 
Callosobruchus maculates
 which 
attack stored pulses. The gadget has 

outer container and an inner perforated container with a rotating rod having 

fixed with plastic brushes on all sides. Th
e seeds with eggs are to be stored in 
the perforated container and the rod ha
s to rotated one full circumference 
clockwise and anti-clockwise for 10 mi
nutes 3 times a day (morning, noon 
and afternoon). Due to the splashing acti
on of the brush in rotating rod, the 
eggs get crushed and thus the damage is prevented. The treatment does not 

affect the germination of seeds.   
Advantages of the invention 
 The device is useful in removing the eggs without affecting the 
germination  Once the eggs are removed there will not be further build up of 
population during storage of seeds. 
 Removing the eggs laid by the beetles will have a significant impact 
in arresting the population
 builds up in storage. 
 Farmers generally fear to store pulse seeds because of the pulse 
beetle damage during storage. The device of the present invention 
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 can remove this fear from the farmers mind and thus motivate them 
ﬁto have their own seedsﬂ.  The patent has been recently commercialized.  
ix. Trap for monitoring stored product insects in warehouse
 (Patent Application No.1733/CHI/2008, dt.24.7.2008) 
 The invention disclosed in this application relates to a device for 
detecting stored grain insects in ba
gstacks which comprises a main hollow 
tube having a diameter in the range of 1.8 to 2.0 cm with equispaced 

perforation in the range of 1.8 to 2 mm 
on its upper portion with a bend at 
one end which ends in a transparent co
llection unit to collect the insects 
falling down from the bend, the other end of main tube being closed.  
     
     
 Advantages of the invention  
 The device is useful in detecting stored grain insects in bag stacks of 
the food grain warehouses without any damage to sacks.   
 The device does not require any bait materials to trap insects. 
 The device is useful in studying the distribution pattern of stored 
product insects in various layers of bag stacks.  
 The device will be useful to validate
 the effect of fumigation by using 
it immediately after fumigation, in 
different layers of the fumigated 
stacks.  The device will also be useful at farm level when farmers store their 
produce in bags.  
 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 TNAU`s Contribution in Biological
 Control of Pest and Diseases 
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
is a highly recognized organization 
making great inroads in the field of ag
rotechnology. Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University™s consistent efforts in contribu
ting to this field involves the efforts 
of various agriculture and horticulture experts includes 
Trichoderma viridi and 
Pseudomonas flouroscens
 Trichoderma viride 
Advantages 
 Environmentally Safe  
 Economically Cheaper  
 Easy to use  
 No Residual Toxicity  
 No Development of Resistance by Pathogens  
 Incraesed multiplication in the soil  
 Protect the crops   Broad spectrum of action  
 Enhances plant growth  
 Compatible with other Bio fertilizers  
 Not harmful to beneficial soil microbes 
Recommended Crops  Black Gram   Green Gram  
 Bengal Gram   Red Gram   Groundnut  
 Sunflower  
 Gingelly   Cotton   Chilli  
 Tomato  
 Turmeric Dosage:
  4g/Kg of Seed as dry Seed Treatment  
Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
  Soil Application: 2.5Kg/ha Pseudomonas fluorescens 
Features of Pseudomonas fluorescens
  Cost Saving  
 Improves the growth and Yield of the Crop  
 Controls Seed born and Soil born fungal diseases  
 Improves the disease resistance power of the crop  
 Improves uptake of minerals  
 Eco-Friendly   Saves Earthworm and other Micro organisms in the soil 
 Recommended Crops:  Cereal Crops  Paddy  
 Ragi  Oil Seeds
  Ground Nut  
 Gingelly   Sun Flower 
 Cotton   Pulses   Vegetable Crops:
   Tomato  
 Brinjal   Chillies   Bitter Gourds  
 Cabbage  
 Cauli Flower 
 Fruit Crops:
   Banana  
 Mango 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Dosage 
 Pseudomonas fluorescens
 @ 10g / kg to control seed born 
Pathogens 
 Soil Application: 10 Kg/ha 
Do™s and Dont™s in Organic Farming 
Do™s in Organic Agriculture 
Climate 
 Appropriate to avoid pests and diseases 
Soil Type 
 To match with the crop cultivated. Ex: Deep well drained soils. 

Crops  With inbuilt disease, pest & other biotic resistance. 
 Acceptability for markets 
 Quality, yield potential 
 Adaptability to varying environmental conditions 
Climate, soils, crops - Appropriateness and suitability are the key 
factors to be considered Pesticides and organic agriculture 
No processed chemical pesticide is approved for use. 
Instead of chemical pesticide the following can be used 
Botanicals Neem based products 
Pongamia based product 
Any botanical with pesticidal property 
Biocontrol or biological 
control agents such as 
 Bacillus thuringensis
 (BT) Natural enemies of pests can be used 
Adopting natural biocontrol measures such as 
 Mixed cropping  Trap crops etc. 

 (Panchakavya, agnihotram,homeo 
medicines, vrikshayurveda are 
also projected as effective 
 No chemical pesticide is the major requirement for O.A. 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 Do not use Agrochemicals  Fertilizer  
 Agrochemicals such as pesticid
es, herbicides, fungicides, plant growth promoters (synthetic hormones) Antibiotics for crop production. 
Do not use products like 
 Antibiotics, pest control chemicals,
 hormones, disinfectants, urea etc 
for Livestock production 
Any processed input considered to be a potential environmental 
hazard is prohibited 
Specific items banned in organic crop production 
Sewage, sludge 
 Genetically engineered crops 
 Ionizing Radiation for food processing 

 Chemical preservatives 
 Land for organic agriculture should NOT have used prohibited 
products/ substances for minimum three years.  
 Banned items in the ﬁSpecificsﬂ list should be checked with 
standards and certifying agencies as they change from time to time 
  Thus, organic way of pest and diseases management plays a 

significant role in organic farming. Th
e knowledge intensive and farmer based 
management approach that encourages na
tural control of pest populations by 
anticipating pest and disease problems and preventing from reaching 

economically damage levels will defini
tely help achieving the target yield 
without causing serious damage on en
vironment and contaminating the food. 
 Pest and Disease Management: Organic Ecosystem 
 For Your Thinking 
World Food day 
 Bonn, Germany, October 16th 2007 - On this World Food Day 2007, 
with the theme of the Right to Food, 
which was recognized as a universal 
human right in 1948 in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, over 850 

million people around the world, part
icularly in least developed countries, 
suffer is the right of every person to 
have regular access to sufficient from 
hunger and malnutrition. For IFOAM, the 
Right to Food nutritionally adequate 
and culturally acceptable food for an acti
ve, healthy life. It is the right to feed 
oneself in dignity and to produce healthy and culturally appropriate food 

through ecologically, socially and economically sound methods, defining one™s 

own food systems, rather than the righ
t to be fed. This counts for each and 
every individual, as well as for communities and regions.  
   
   
    
   ﬁWe need to make our farming practices and our food economy 
subject to standards set not by the industrial system but by the 
health of ecosystems and human communitiesﬂ
 Soil - The Living Dynamic System Soul Of Infinite Life Upon this handful of soil our survival depends. Husband it and it will grow 
our food, fuel, our shelter and surround us with beauty 
Abuse it and the soil will collapse and die 
taking man with it 
